CBI could question Odisha chief minister Naveen Patnaik in connection with alleged irregularities in allocation of coal block to Hindalco as he had written a letter to the coal ministry after application of the Aditya Birla company was rejected in 2005.
CBI sources said as its officials were scrutinizing the documents they found a letter written by Patnaik requesting for a relook and reverse rejection of Hindalco's application for Talabira II block in Odisha.
CBI said while no final decision has been taken as to who all would be questioned, the sources said the chief minister would be questioned only if need was felt to seek his views on the reasons for recommending coal blocks to Hindalco.
CBI sources said 46-year-old Kumar Manglam Birla, chairman of Aditya Birla Group, had written a letter to the Prime Minister's Office which had forwarded the letter to the coal ministry.
CBI has alleged in its FIR after rejection of Hindalco's plea in 2005, Birla wrote two letters and held a "personal meeting" with the then coal secretary PC Parakh, after which a decision was reversed and Hindalco was given the block which was earlier meant for two public sector undertakings Mahanadi Coal Fields and Neyveli Lignite.
"Pursuant to these letters and personal meeting between Parakh and Birla, Parakh, by abusing his official position as a public servant, recommended the allocation of Talabira II along with Talabira III coal block to Hindalco Industries Limited, along with other two companies without any valid basis or change in circumstances and with the sole intention to show undue favours to Hindalco Industries Limited," the agency alleged in its FIR.
The allegations have been denied by Hindalco and Parakh.
The former coal secretary has said if he was a conspirator, so was Prime Minister as he had signed the allocation letter to Hindalco.
The agency, in the meanwhile, has started scrutinizing the documents recovered from searches at the five offices of Hindalco and residence of Parakh in Hyderabad on October 15.
The sources said the agency would question Birla and Parakh in connection with the case but that might take time as CBI officials would first examine the documents to gather material evidence.
Sources said the FIR is the first step and all the allegations would be probed during the course of investigations.
They said the agency has named people in the FIR only on the prima facie evidence basis and further investigation is going on.
Even as he drew all round support from industry and some ministers, Kumar Mangalam Birla on Friday broke his silence rubbishing CBI charges against him in a coal block allocation case saying he was not worried as no wrong has been committed.
Birla, chairman of the Aditya Birla group flagship firm Hindalco, met finance minister P Chidambaram and revenue secretary Sumit Bose and later told reporters that he had discussed the FIR issue with the minister.
"As of now I am not worried about it.
There is nothing wrong (that) has been done.
So why should one worry?"
He was asked whether the CBI FIR naming him and Hindalco in the coalgate scam would cast a shadow on the Aditya Birla Group's application for a bank licence.
Meanwhile, industry body CII on Friday joined others in slamming the FIR against Birla but issued a nuanced statement saying while CBI had the right to proceed against anyone it should be careful before taking action against reputed industrialists to avoid creating a sense of fear.
Without referring to the Birla case, CII chief Kris Gopalakrishnan said, "It is desirable to ensure that all facts of the case are laid upfront before proceeding against respected and reputed individuals."
He said that reputations of institutions and individuals take years to build and therefore, extreme caution needs to be exercised before any action is taken, which jeopardizes reputation that institutions and individuals build for themselves.
The coal block that triggered a CBI case against Kumar Mangalam Birla cannot start production for another four to five years as it has not been able to get clearances from various authorities since it was allotted in 2005.
The CBI has alleged that former coal secretary PC Parakh abused his position to award part of the Talabira 2&3 block in Odisha to Birla-promoted HindalcoBSE 0.90 % - a charge emphatically denied by both.
But on the ground, Hindalco and two state miners - Mahanadi Coalfields and Neyveli Lignite, which have stakes in the venture, have not been able to make progress in the absence of necessary approvals from Central and state authorities.
The coal ministry has even issued notices to the three firms for delay in developing the block.
A senior official in Mahanadi Coalfields, which is carrying out project activities for mine development, said all major milestones including obtaining the mining lease, land acquisition and forest clearances were pending.
"The block may take anywhere between four to five years to start production as no progress has been made.
The attached end-use projects will come up before the block (is ready for mining)," he said.
A coal ministry official said Hindalco has invested as much as Rs 17,000 crore in the attached 900-mw captive power plant, a 1.5 million tonnes aluminium refinery and a 3.5 lakh tonne smelter in Odisha.
The three firms had floated a joint venture company called MNH Sakthi Ltd with equity holding of 70% by Mahanadi Coalfields and 15% each by Neyveli Lignite and Hindalco to develop the block and share the production in that ratio.
The first application for the Talabira 2 & 3 mine, which has 152 million tonnes of reserves, was made by Indal in 1996.
The company was acquired by Hindalco in 2000 which was allocated the mine on November 10, 2005.
The investigating agency has alleged that Birla influenced Parakh to overturn a decision of the 25th screening committee that earmarked the coal block for government companies.
The FIR filed on Tuesday alleged criminal conspiracy by Birla and misuse of position by Parekh.
Hindalco had said it followed every process required for coal allocation in line with government regulations.
The CBI is investigating irregularities in coal block allotments made to private companies after the CAG alleged that coal worth Rs 1.86 lakh crore was given free by the government.
The CBI, which is carrying out Supreme Court-monitored probe into the Coalgate scam, may book some more private companies soon which were allegedly awarded blocks in violation of norms.
"There are other companies also, which had been favoured by government servants at different levels," said a senior CBI officer two days after the agency named Kumar Mangalam Birla and his company Hindalco along with former coal secretary P C Parakh in an FIR filed in connection with allegedly illegal allotment of a coal block in Odisha.
Sources said CBI has recovered some documents which suggest that Hindalco's bid for a coal block was also backed by Odisha CM Naveen Patnaik after it had been turned down by the screening committee under the coal ministry.
Patnaik accepted having recommended Hindalco's case for Talabira II coal block in Odisha, but defended his action by saying the project would have brought revenue and jobs to the state.
"The letter was written because the state would have a great deal of revenue and many jobs," Patnaik told media persons who had approached the CM for his reaction to reports on TV channels saying he may be questioned by the CBI in connection with the Hindalco case.
"Let me clarify that no information has been received regarding questioning or otherwise," Patnaik said.
In Delhi, CBI director Ranjit Sinha confirmed that Patnaik's recommendation for Hindalco was being examined, but refrained from confirming reports that his team planned to question the Odisha CM shortly.
"We will examine whosoever is required to be examined," he said.
Sources said the agency does not have any plan to question Patnaik yet.
A senior officer said, "Most of the coal blocks had been recommended by state governments only.
We will examine under what circumstances the chief minister's office recommended Hindalco when there were other applicants as well.
But that doesn't mean Naveen Patnaik is under probe."
The CM's office in Bhubaneswar said Patnaik wrote to the PM in August 2005 to support Hindalco's bid for Talabira II "keeping the best interests of the state in mind".
In its FIR, CBI has alleged that while the screening committee at its 25th meeting had turned down Hindalco's bid for Talabira II and had awarded the block to PSUs Neyveli Lignite Corporation and Mahanadi Coalfields Limited, the decision was reversed after a meeting between the then coal secretary P C Parakh and Kumar Mangalam Birla.
The agency has not accused Parakh, widely reputed for his probity, for quid pro quo, but has accused him of misusing his official power to reverse the decision of the screening committee to allocate a coal block exclusively marked for PSUs to Hindalco.
Oil minister Veerappa Moily has rejected a draft note for the Cabinet proposing exploration of coal-bed methane (CBM) rights to state-run Coal India without auction and directed bureaucrats to re-draft it to encourage competition and efficiency, officials said.
Moily rejected the proposal saying Coal India should not get automatic rights of over CBM exploration only because most of coal blocks are held by the public sector firm, which is the single largest coal producing company in the world.
"Coal India is not an expert in CBM exploration as ONGC is not an expert in coal mining.
The government can't allow ONGC to mine coal just because coal is found in its oil and gas blocks," a senior oil ministry official said.
Coal India operates over 470 coal mines in eight states.
Moily has also put in a new team of officials to re-draft the note, which is expected to be ready by November, officials said.
According to laws governing mining in India, coal mining is the mandate of the coal ministry while the oil ministry regulates exploration of CBM.
Some scam-wary bureaucrats in the oil ministry, however, favoured giving blocks only to public sector energy firms to avoid controversies and ensure immunity from investigative agencies.
Officials said if they allowed private investments in these coal blocks, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) might start a witchhunt later like what has happened to the former coal secretary Prakash Chandra Parakh.
CBI on Tuesday filed a first information report against Hindalco, Kumar Mangalam Birla and Parekh on alleged irregularities in allocation of a coal block.
Even the finance ministry had raised objections that allowing private companies to explore shale resources in their existing blocks would amount to giving them undue benefits post auction, an official said requesting anonymity.
In order to avoid controversies, the government approved a shale gas policy last month that allowed only state firmsONGC and Oil India-to explore shale resources in oil and gas blocks held by them.
The policy was approved in spite of Moily's initial resistance to exclude private explorers.
"The policy was approved, but not without a strong note by the oil minister.
He directed the ministry to prepare another policy allowing private companies in shale exploration, which needs new technology and huge investments," the official said requesting anonymity.
The oil ministry on Monday issued shale exploration guidelines to ONGC and Oil India, which provided strict timelines for companies to complete specified minimum exploration works, officials said.
P C Parakh is not the only former coal secretary who spoke against the flawed manner of allocation of coal blocks.
In his exit interview to CAG in February 2012, the then coal secretary Alok Perti told the auditor that coal blocks were being allocated without adequate due diligence and were being cornered by companies which did not have the wherewithal to mine the deposits.
Perti said the allocation of coal blocks to ill-equipped and undeserving beneficiaries was the main reason why coal could not be mined from many of the blocks.
He said the allottees were hamstrung to mine the deposits themselves, and they were also unable to find foreign collaborators who would look for stakes: something which was not provided under the captive consumption agreement.
"There was lack of expertise in the private sector for mining and foreign parties were reluctant to come unless they were provided a part of the coal production," Perti told CAG in his exit interview on the failure of companies to start mining.
CAG highlighted the lack of due diligence as many of these companies which bagged blocks were not competent to be allocated mines since they had no expertise in mining and had not provided any assurance how they will achieve this task once mines were allocated.
A day after it lodged an FIR against Hindalco and its boss Kumar Mangalam Birla, CBI said it had recovered Rs 25 crore in cash from the corporate office of the aluminum major in the city.
The cash was found by the CBI team which searched the Hindalco office in connection with the FIR on Tuesday into the illegal allocation of a coal mine to the company, CBI spokesperson Kanchan Prasad said.
She also said the money was handed over to the income tax department for a probe.
The I-T department is expected to issue a notice to the company shortly.
When contacted, Hindalco's spokesperson reacted to CBI's claim by saying "we have to find out".
CBI sources said the money was seized and handed over to the I-T department after company officials failed to account for the big amount.
Sources also claimed that documents relevant for their investigation into the mining rights for a coal block in Odisha, Talbaria II, to Hindalco were recovered during the searches carried out in the offices of the company in Delhi and Mumbai.
Sources said officials belonging to CBI's Economic Offence Wing also found gold coins in the offices.
The FIR against Birla and Hindalco, along with former coal secretary PC Parakh, has sent jitters among industry and bureaucracy.
Many consider Birla to be a respecter of rules, while Parakh has a reputation for probity.
However, CBI sources justified the action by pointing to the details of their FIR against the top-notch businessman and the bureaucrat widely perceived to be a stickler for rules.
The FIR alleges that the award of 15% mining rights for Talabira II forced Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC), the PSU which was allotted the coal block earmarked exclusively for government entities, to scrap its plan to set up a power plant.
Reacting to Parakh's allegation that "CBI did not understand the case", sources in the agency said the FIR was registered after a painstaking process of due diligence and was based on facts.
They also said the agency would inform the Supreme Court about the FIR during the next hearing on Coalgate.
In its FIR, CBI alleged that Parakh upturned his own decision in giving Hindalco mining rights for 15% of Talabira II's coal deposit.
Significantly, it has not accused the former bureaucrat of a quid pro quo: in short, that he changed his decision for gains, only charging him with misuse of official position.
The agency also refuted Parakh's claim that "CBI did not understand the case".
A senior officer said, "The case has been registered after thorough enquiry and is based on documents.
In fact, we are going to inform Supreme Court about it in the next hearing."
According to the FIR, the Parakh-led screening committee under the coal ministry -- the body which allocated coal blocks -- had in its 25th meeting in June 2005 turned down Hindalco's application for the allocation of Talabira II block.
The coal block was allocated to NLC to be mined along with Talabira III with another PSU, Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd (MCL).
Accordingly, the allocation letter was issued to NLC and MCL on July 15, 2005.
CBI has alleged that Parakh changed his stand after a meeting with Birla in the same month, stressing that the businessman had written two letters, on May 7, 2005 and, again on June 17 that year, to stake Hindalco's claim for Talabira II coal block.
Disregarding the decision of the screening committee, Parakh proposed the formation of a joint venture company between MCL, NLC and Hindalco with the equity shareholding of 70%, 15% and 15%.
The CBI action on a top industrialist and senior former bureaucrats will demoralize civil servants and heap another bout of "policy paralysis" on the system, experts warned on Wednesday.
Some former civil servants said bureaucrats will now be scared to take decisions for fear of being sent to jail once they retire.
"Bureaucrats will not take any initiatives now.
They will play crossword and golf.
After all, nobody wants to go to jail at the age of 60 for taking decisions," former cabinet secretary TSR Subramanian said.
"Anyway, this is election time and everything will slow down.
Decision-making will slow down.
Investments are down and decision-making will stall," the former bureaucrat said.
The 2G spectrum scam had sparked off "policy paralysis" as civil servants delayed taking decisions for fear of being prosecuted.
This stalled decision-making in the government, scared investors away and deeply hurt growth which slowed to a decade's low of 5% in 2012-13.
Delayed decisions and policy uncertainty hurt the industrial sector, shaving off much needed growth.
The mining sector was the worst hit and is yet to recover from the blows inflicted by policy inaction and regulatory delays.
"This incident will demoralize senior officers who have to take complex decisions.
There has to be some solid evidence.
You cannot jump the gun like this, you cannot criminalize every administrative decision," former cabinet secretary Naresh Chandra said, adding that this would impact decision-making in the government.
Chandra said the CBI was being trigger happy and hoped that it had solid evidence to back up its claims.
"Obviously it won't go down well with the bureaucracy.
I hope the CBI has concrete evidence.
They are now indulging in trigger happy investigations.
It seems to be a shortcut FIR," said Chandra.
Civil servants and experts also questioned the move to lodge a first information report against former coal secretary P C Parakh.
"Both Parakh and H C Gupta (another former coal secretary) have spotless reputations.
By reputation, they are some of the most honest bureaucrats.
If you catch hold of them then you are doing great damage to the system.
I am not saying there are no crooks in the system but catch hold of the crooks," Subramanian said.
A Cabinet minister, who did not wish to be identified, said the CBI action would scare foreign investors and prompt bureaucrats to only clear routine files.
"What will foreign investors think when they read this news.
They will say it is better not to venture out there," said the minister.
The CBI on Tuesday registered an FIR against one of India's best-known industrialists Kumar Mangalam Birla and his company Hindalco, along with former coal secretary P C Parakh, for alleged irregularities in the allocation of a coal block, sending shockwaves among the corporate world and bureaucracy.
It also put a fresh spotlight on Prime Minister Manmohan Singh with Parakh alleging that the allocation was approved by the PM and the CBI should have made him the "accused number one".
Sources said the FIR, the 14th into the mega scam, relates to the allegedly illegality in letting Hindalco access 15% of the deposits from a coal block in Odisha, Talabira II, which was earmarked exclusively for PSUs.
The AV Birla Group angrily reacted to the allegation and dismissed it as preposterous.
"The reality of the matter is very different from what has been projected ... the actual allocation of the mine was done in November 2005, which is nine years after the first application was made.
To imply that our chairman, Kumar Mangalam Birla, managed to overturn the decision of the screening committee is preposterous," Hindalco MD Debu Bhattacharya said in a statement.
CBI sources familiar with details of the case said those named in the FIR have been accused of criminal conspiracy, criminal misconduct and misuse of official position under Section 120-B of the Indian Penal Code and relevant sections of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
CBI teams carried out coordinated searches at six locations in Mumbai, Hyderabad, Delhi and Bhubaneswar.
The development also came as a jolt to the bureaucracy, surprising many senior officials who sympathized with Parakh.
The former coal secretary has a reputation for honesty, and had criticized the policy of allocation of coal blocks by the government, saying it led to windfall gains for the allottees.
In fact, he had also argued for the blocks to be auctioned.
Parakh is the second former coal secretary after H C Gupta to be named in a Coalgate case.
Given Birla's standing as a leading corporate chief who has not been stained by any controversy, as well as Parakh's credentials as an honest bureaucrat, there was considerable curiosity about the type of evidence CBI has collected.
The FIR, it is learnt, does not mention the date or venue where Birla met Parakh to get the decision of the screening committee altered.
It is also silent on whether money changed hands or favours were granted.
However, sources in the CBI justified the FIR saying it was based on evidence gathered through professional investigation.
"We have foolproof evidence," a senior CBI officer said.
Giving details, sources said Talabira II was allocated to a PSU, Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC), while Talabira III was allocated to another PSU, Mahanadi Coalfields Limited, in 2005 under what was known as "government dispensation scheme".
The coal blocks allocated under the scheme were to be mined exclusively by PSUs.
However, the decision was changed after Birla had a detailed meeting with then coal secretary Parakh, CBI sources claimed.
The investigating agency has accused Parkah of overturning the decision, taken by the screening committee of the coal ministry at its 25th meeting, and let Hindalco mine Talabira II on a sharing basis.
The agency has also alleged that while the irregularity hurt NLC, the PSU chose to keep mum.
"To include a private company was against the norms as the allocations were done under government dispensation scheme where only PSUs were eligible," said a senior CBI officer.
This is the first FIR to have been filed by the CBI in connection with the alleged irregularities in the implementation of the "government dispensation scheme".
According to a coal ministry showcause notice issued on September 29, 2010 to Hindalco, NLC and Mahanadi Coalfield, mining has not started in Talabira I and Talabira II yet.
The show cause notice said "critical milestones such as bank guarantee, forest clearance, land acquisition were still pending for the Talabira II coal block".
The Supreme Court monitored Coalgate investigation has already seen the CBI naming Naveen Jindal, a Congress MP and chairman of Jindal Steel and Power Ltd, former Union minister Dasari Narayan Rao, Lokmat group chief and Congress MP Vijay Darda and several other industrialists and officials.
The probe has witnessed several dramatic moments, as an attempt by Ashwini Kumar to interfere with the CBI probe when he was law minister resulted in his exit from the Cabinet.
Several crucial files on allocation of coal blocks have mysteriously disappeared from the government, leading the opposition to demand the resignation of the prime minister.
After a wait of three months, the CBI finally questioned Congress MP and industrialist Naveen Jindal in connection with the Coalgate scam on Thursday.
According to sources, Jindal was questioned at a CBI guesthouse in an undisclosed location for several hours and he was asked about his role in the allocation of coal block to his company.
Jindal has been booked along with former minister of state for coal Dasari Narayan Rao and screening committee members for alleged cheating and criminal conspiracy in bagging Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Jharkhand in 2008.
A source said Jindal was asked whether he influenced the decision of the screening committee as a Congress leader and about the alleged bribe paid to Rao for favouring his company.
Though CBI did not confirm, sources said Jindal joined the questioning at 11 am and left around 5 pm.
Officials said he would be called again as he is an accused in the case.
The agency conceded his request that he should not be subjected to media glare after which the venue was changed from the CBI headquarters to a guesthouse where his examination took place, they said.
Jindal Steel and Power Limited did not comment on his questioning.
The development comes at a time when CBI is already planning to file chargesheets in five of its 13 cases registered so far in the Coalgate scam, said sources.
CBI has already questioned some Jharkhand government officials, screening committee members, former coal secretary H C Gupta and other officials of coal and power ministries in this case.
During its probe, the then minister of state was named as an accused in the FIR in which it was alleged that he had received Rs 2.25 crore camouflaged as investment from one of Jindal's firms within a year of allocation of a coal block to him.
CBI sources said Jindal Steel and Power Limited and Gagan Sponge Iron Limited, also a Jindal firm, had bagged Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Birbhum, Jharkhand in 2008 by alleged misrepresentation of facts when Rao was minister of state for coal.
Reacting to the FIR, head of external affairs, JSPL Manu Kapoor had said earlier, "JSPL, as a law abiding company, is governed by a strong ethical code of conduct.
This is an ongoing CBI investigation into coal block allocation.
At this stage of investigation, JSPL is committed to fully cooperate with CBI."
The Supreme Court on Thursday expanded the scope of the coal scam investigations and issued notice to 7 states - Jharhand, Chhattisarh, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal.
The apex court wants to know from these states their role in the allocation of coal blocks done by the Centre.
The SC decided to seek view of the states after the Centre said allocation of coal blocks was mere identification of mines for private parties for captive consumption purposes.
The SC asked the states to answer what did they understand by allocation of coal blocks by the Centre.
States were also asked to answer whether competitive bidding was needed for coal block allocations.
The next hearing in the case is scheduled on October 29.
Claiming that there was no scam in coal sector, including that of coal block allocation in states, Union Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal on Tuesday said, the Centre will specially consider the case of Odisha if it participated in the bidding process for allotment of five new coal blocks in the Talcher area.
There is no scam in the coal sector during the UPA Government.
Coal blocks are being allocated since 1993 and we have followed the process.
The previous NDA government had allocated 43 coal blocks during its tenure, Mr.
Jaiswal told reporters in Bhubaneswar.
Stating that since the Coal India Limited (CIL) alone cannot meet the growing demands of coal, Mr.
Jaiswal said, the government allocated coal blocks to private players as done by previous governments.
How can you say that all governments indulged in scam in coal block allocation, he asked adding that from Narashima Rao to Atal Behari Vajpayee government, all allocated coal blocks to private companies.
To a question on de-allocation of three coal blocks given to Odishas public sector undertakings, Mr.
Jaiswal said, the Ministry has absolutely no role in the process.
Those who failed to achieve the milestone have been served with de-allocation notices, he said.
On Odisha governments demand of re-allocation of de-allocated coal blocks, Mr.
Jaiswal said, We cannot do that (re-allocation).
The inter-ministerial group takes decision in that regard.
The Ministry has no role in that.
When asked about Odishas steel and mines minister R K Singhs statement on re-allocation of de-allocated coal blocks to central PSUs like NTPC, the Union Minister said, We had given commitment to NTPC, but never given similar assurance to Odisha government.
Earlier, the Coal Ministry had de-allocated three coal blocks like Utkal-D, Mandakini-B and Radhikapur-E coal blocks allocated to Odisha Mining Corporation (OMC) and Odisha Hydro Power Corporation (OHPC) respectively.
The state government had recently submitted a memorandum to the Centre demanding re-allocation of the three coal blocks in favour of State PSUs.
The Union Minister, however, said that the Ministry will specially consider the case of Odisha if it participated in the fresh tender for five coal blocks located in the State.
We will specially consider Odishas case if it participates in the bidding process for 5 coal blocks, Mr.
Jaiswal said.
The Ministry of Coal has put five coal blocks Kudanali-Laburi, Sarapal-Napara, Tentuloi, Chandrabila and Brahmani in the Talcher coalfield for tender.
Last date of tender for the five blocks has been extended till February 8.
Odisha government has already applied for bidding process for four coal blocks except Brahmani, sources said.
When reporters pointed out that though three coal blocks of Odisha PSUs have been de-allocated for non-performance, same yardstick is not used for Chendipada coal block allocated for PSUs of Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra and Chhattishgarh.
There is no politics in de-allocation process.
The de-allocation is done by a committee.
The state governments allegation of favouring other states do not arise as UP and Chhattisgarh are ruled by non-Congress states, the minister said claiming complete transparency in the coal block allotment process.
The Aam Aadmi Party has demanded the setting up of a Special Investigation Team, after reports that the Government had vetted the Central Bureau of Investigations status report on the Coalgate scam before it was filed in the Supreme Court.
Demanding resignation of the Union Law Minister and the Attorney General, the AAP in a statement said: This brazen interference in the Coalgate investigation by this government, an investigation being currently monitored by the Supreme Court, shows the desperation of this government and requires the immediate sacking of the Law Minister and the Attorney General, apart from officials of the Prime Ministers Office.
In fact, it requires the resignation of the Prime Minister himself.
In any case, these facts make out an unanswerable case for an independent SIT in the Coalgate scam.
According to AAPs spokesperson, during the last hearing held on March 12 Prashant Bhushan had made the plea that since the investigation of the Coalgate scam involves inquiring into the role of the Prime Minister and other Cabinet Ministers, the CBI would not be able to investigate it independently because it is directly controlled by them.
The petition in the case has been filed by Prashant Bhushan on behalf of the Centre for Public Interest Litigation and the Common Cause.
All this shows why the government is not willing to let go of their control of the CBI at any cost, because an independent CBI under an independent Lokpal would result in more than half of the present Cabinet going to jail, the spokesperson said.
Main opposition BJP on Monday once again targeted Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in Rajya Sabha on missing files pertaining to coal mines allocation saying the scam is monumental and demanded that he clarify on it.
Raising the issue during Zero Hour, Prakash Javadekar (BJP) said two days back the Prime Minister said he was not the custodian of files whereas the Opposition believed he is not only the custodian of files but also the custodian of the nation but not performing both the tasks well.
It is a monumental scam and occurred when the Prime Minister was the Coal Minister...PM should give a statement on this, Mr.
Javadekar said, demanding to know whether any FIR was lodged in the missing files issue despite the Supreme Court asking for it.
Amid attack over missing files pertaining to allocation of coal mines, Prime Minister had on August 30 said in Rajya Sabha, I am not the custodian of files in the Coal Ministry.
Dissatisfied with the reply, Mr.
Javadekar launched a scathing attack on the government saying it is doing a massive cover up and sought Prime Ministers statement on it.
He said unfortunately the Committee, formed by Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal included a Joint Secretary level officer who is charged with changing the files with the CBI.
This is like handing over the keys of the treasury to the accused, Mr.
Javadekar said adding, CBI as well as the Coal Ministry has said before PAC (Public Accounts Committee) that all important files are missing...We demand dont keep such people who were instrumental in changing the files.
As he said that the scam has smeared the face of the government and continued to target Prime Minister, members from treasury benches countered him while BJP members shouted shame-shame{ .
Ravi Shankar Prasad (BJP) joined Mr.
Javadekar saying, There was a discussion on it but Prime Ministers clarifications are pending.
This is a monumental scam.
Mr.
Prasad said the Prime Minister should make a statement, which saw Minister of State Rajeev Shukla as well as some Congress members retorting that Dr.
Singh has already replied twice on the issue.
Deputy Chairman P.J.
Kurien interrupted saying, It is not the fault of the Prime Minister.
Prime Minister had come.
However, BJP members kept shouting slogans like PM jawab do (PM reply) with Purushottam Khodabhia Rupala saying the party will continue to raise the issue of missing files till the time they were recovered.
After procedural wrangles were ironed out, the CBIs probe into Coalgate has now reached the Prime Ministers Office (PMO) and its officials.
Investigators have recorded statements of two former PMO officials, questioning them as witnesses in the questionable allocation of coal blocks, sources in the CBI said on Tuesday.
Next in line, they indicated, would be Prime Ministers Adviser T.K.A.
Nair, whose statement would be recorded as a witness in connection with the alleged irregularities in the allocation during 2006-09 when Manmohan Singh himself had looked after the Coal Ministry.
At that time, Mr.
Nair served him as Principal Secretary.
The CBI questioned two mid-level officials Vini Mahajan and Ashish Gupta who were posted in the PMO during 2006-09.
The CBI has also summoned the former Coal Secretary, H.C.
Gupta, as an accused.
He is believed to be a crucial link in the alleged irregularities when the Ministry was under the charge of Dr. Singh.
He is likely to appear before the CBI on Thursday.
As Coal Secretary, Mr.
Gupta was the de-facto chairman of the Screening Committee that allocated coal blocks, the sources said.
Earlier, the CBIs efforts to question Mr.
Gupta hit a dead-end when the Ministry of Corporate Affairs nodal ministry for the Competition Commission of India, of which member he was till last week denied the investigating agency permission.
The CBI has to file a progress report before the Supreme Court on July 10.
It is probing how valuable mining rights were granted at throwaway prices to companies that made windfall gains.
The CBI took up the case after a report from the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) said the exchequer suffered a revenue loss of Rs.
1.86 lakh crore through the allocation of coal blocks to select companies.
The CBI has so far registered 11 regular cases.
During 2006-09, 68 coal blocks were allotted to 151 companies, and the files relating to some of them have gone missing.
The CBI registered the latest FIR, the 12th in the case, earlier this month, naming Congress MP and industrialist Naveen Jindal and the former Minister of State for Coal, Dasari Narayan Rao, as accused.
The CBI said the governments screening committee, which processed applications from companies, did not conduct background checks.
It also questioned the working of the committee: in its earlier status report submitted to the Supreme Court, it had said the allocations during 2006-09 were done without verification of the credentials of the companies which had allegedly misrepresented facts about themselves.
The CAG, too, pointed out that the Screening Committee recommended the allocation of a coal block to a particular company.
However, the minutes of the meeting that made the decision did not indicate how each of the applicants was evaluated.
The CAG report said a transparent method was not followed by the Screening Committee for allocation.
Dropping a political bombshell, CBI Director Ranjit Sinha on Friday told the Supreme Court that the agencys status report on coal allocation scam was shared with Law Minister Ashwani Kumar and senior officials of PMO and Coal ministry as desired by them..
Sinhas two-page affidavit is silent on whether any changes were made in the draft report after it was shared with the government before being filed in the apex court in a sealed envelope.
The affidavit assumes importance in the wake of allegations that the contents of the report were diluted at governments behest.
The affidavit, filed on the direction of the apex court, belies the claim made by CBI counsel on the last date of hearing that the coalgate scam report was not shared with any member of the government.
I submit that the draft of the same (status report) was shared with Law Minister as desired by him prior to its submission before the Supreme Court.
Besides the political executive, it was also shared with one joint secretary level officer each of Prime Ministers Office and Ministry of Coal as desired by them, the affidavit said.
In his affidavit, Sinha assured the apex court that the agency will not share further status reports in this case with any member of the political executive.
He also said that the latest status report being filed on Friday has not been shared with any political executive in any manner whatsoever.
I confirm that the present status report being filed in this court has not been shared with any political executive in any manner whatsoever.
Directors of the five private companies booked by the CBI for allegedly furnishing false information while applying for coal blocks will soon be summoned for questioning
The Supreme Court on Monday issued notice to the Centre and the CBI on a plea for a probe by a special investigation team into the alleged irregularities in the coal block allocations.
It sought response from them on a public interest litigation petition seeking cancellation of the licenses granted by the government for coal blocks to various private companies.
The bench, however, refused to stay the licenses, which were allegedly granted in violation of law.
Some Coal Ministry officials have been quizzed by the Central Bureau of Investigation in connection with the missing coal block allocation files.
Having registered two preliminary enquiries in the matter, the CBI summoned the Coal Ministry officials who had dealt with the file, which have now disappeared mysteriously.
Some of the officials produced themselves before the agency for clarifications, whereas some are yet to be examined.
The CBI is probing the disappearance to ascertain whether the files were deliberately removed to destroy evidence.
The preliminary enquiries have been registered for the periods 1993-2005 and 2006-09 in connection with the missing files which pertain to crucial minutes of the 25 and the 26 screening committees that recommended coal block allocations.
Some of the files related to the applications made by certain top corporate houses to which coal blocks were allotted.
The Coal Ministry submitted to the CBI on Monday a detailed report on the missing files pertaining to coal block allocations, said an official.
We have sent the report to the CBI on Monday, a Coal Ministry official said on the condition of anonymity.
Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal did not make any comment on whether the files have been dispatched.
However, he said, The instructions of the Supreme Court are being followed.
When asked about the details of the report that the ministry has sent to CBI, the official said, It is a confidential correspondence between the CBI and the ministry.
I am sorry that I will not talk about it.
When asked as to when the Ministry will file complaint with regard to the missing files, he said, We will take action in accordance with the directions of the Supreme Court and as per the law and within the timeline which has been prescribed for us.
Nearly 150 files and documents were to be received by the CBI from the Coal Ministry.
Senior officials attached with the probe had yesterday said that every effort was made by CBI to locate documents and files that were seized during raids earlier.
While hearing the case on August 29, the Supreme Court had directed the CBI to give a list of documents, files and information sought by it within five days to the Coal Ministry which, in turn, was to furnish them within two weeks.
The agency in its letter dated September 2 to Attorney General G.E.
Vahanvati had given an exhaustive list of over 50 allocations, the files of which have not been received by it.
The apex court had directed the Coal Ministry that if any document remains untraceable, then FIRs have to be lodged by the Coal Ministry with the CBI within a week thereafter.
Holding that the missing documents are vital for the probe in the scam, the apex court directed the Coal Ministry to lodge complaint with the CBI if it fails to trace any document sought by the agency.
BJP demand for the Prime Minister's resignation over coal block allocations and a host of other issues on Tuesday stalled Parliament proceedings, leading to the abrupt adjournment of the Lok Sabha without transacting any business.
Proceedings were also disrupted with Samajwadi Party slamming the government over Chinese incursions in Ladakh and Trinamool Congress accusing the Centre of treating West Bengal in a step-motherly manner.
Rajya Sabha witnessed two adjournments till 2 PM, while the Lok Sabha was adjourned for the day due to unabated slogan-shouting by protesting members in the Well.
While BJP also sought sacking of Law Minister Ashwani Kumar alleging his interference in preparation of CBI report to the Supreme Court on the coal scam, DMK sought resignation of P C Chacko as the Chairman of Joint Parliamentary Committee looking into the 2G scam.
At one point, Yashwant Sinha of the BJP walked up to DMK leader T R Baalu and had some discussion.
As Lok Sabha reassembled at noon after the first adjournment, members of BJP, Trinamool Congress, SP and Left parties trooped into the Well raising slogans on their respective demands.
A group of Congress members raised vociferous slogans and waved placards demanding a separate Telangana state.
A TDP member was also in the Well with a similar placard.
Left members raised slogans against "state-sponsored violence" in Mamata Banerjee-ruled West Bengal.
Slogan-shouting DMK members were also in the Well as former Telecom Minister A Raja was seen standing in the aisle and Baalu seeking to raise the Telecom issue in the din.
As the din continued, AIADMK leader M Thambidurai who was in the Chair, adjourned the House for the day.
Similar scenes were witnessed in the Rajya Sabha with slogan shouting BJP members trooping into the Well demanding Prime Minister's resignation, forcing its adjournment first till noon and later till 2 PM.
Senior CBI officer Vivek Dutt, who headed the coalgate scam probe team, and three others were on Friday sent to three days in the agencys custody by a Delhi court for allegedly taking a bribe of Rs.
7 lakh from a businessman to favour him in a land dispute case.
Mr.
Dutt, a Superintendent of Police, CBI inspector Rajesh Chandra Karnatak, alleged middleman Rajesh Pachisia and businessman Dinesh Chand Gupta were produced before the court where CBI sought seven days police custody of the four accused.
All the accused are remanded in CBI custody till 21 May, Special CBI Judge V.K.
Gupta said.
Mr.
Dutt, however, claimed innocence and alleged a conspiracy has been hatched to keep him out of the Supreme Court-monitored coalgate probe team.
During the hearing, the CBI prosecutor told the court that Mr.
Dutt and Karnatak were in the same branch in the agency and Mr.
Pachisia was in regular contact with them.
The CBI said Mr.
Dinesh Chand Gupta had a land dispute and a cheating case was registered against him at Amar Colony police station in New Delhi and Mr.
Dutt used to pressurise the Delhi Police officials, who were investigating the cheating case, to quash the FIR and for this he had demanded Rs.
15 lakh from Mr.
Dinesh Chand Gupta.
The prosecutor said the SHO of Amar Colony police station was initially reluctant but later he succumbed to the pressure and the FIR was quashed.
The CBI said Mr.
Pachisia was apprehended on Friday when was handing over Rs.
7 lakh to Mr. Karnatak.
The prosecutor told the court that Rs.
15 lakh cash was recovered from Mr.
Pachisia, Mr.
Karnatak and Mr.
Dinesh Chand Gupta.
Seeking seven days custody of the four accused, the prosecutor also said that during the searches conducted by the agency, Rs.
24 lakh cash was recovered from the residence of Mr.
Karnatak on Friday.
Opposing the CBIs plea for police custody, the defence counsel said Mr.
Dutt was investigating a very important case of coalgate scam under the supervision of the Supreme Court and if such an allegation is levelled against such a senior official, then the court should look into it very cautiously.
Mr.
Dutts counsel said someone was trying to destroy career of the senior officer.
The doubt which we have in our mind is that when an officer is involved in a very important case, then someone may try to divert the attention.
Someone might want to remove him from the probe, the counsel said.
He told the court that his client is being targetted and nothing has been recovered from his possession by the agency.
He is investigating an important case under the supervision of the Supreme Court and somebody wants him not to be the part of the probe team...
This is simply a device to divert the attention that the investigation in the coal scam is vitiated and the officer is corrupt, the counsel said.
The advocates, appearing for the other accused, argued the CBI has not followed proper procedures in this case and even the case diary is not proper.
Countering the claims of the defence counsel, the CBI said they have done the investigating in a fair manner and no injustice is being done to anyone.
Can we do injustice to our officer?...
Cash has been recovered, documents have been recovered and we are doing it in a fair manner and no injustice is being done, the prosecutor said.
He further said they have recorded many conversations between Mr.
Dutt and the SHO and there are four independent witnesses who were present at the time when the cash was recovered from the possession of the accused.
The defence counsel also alleged the arrest of the four accused was illegal as they were arrested at 7 p.m. on Friday but they were allowed to inform their families only at 1 a.m.
The advocate said the maximum sentence for the offence of conspiracy under the IPC and the Prevention of Corruption Act, for which they are charged with, is seven years and in such a situation, reasons for arrest have to be recorded, which has not been done in this case.
Mr.
Dutts counsel said why a senior CBI officer would get involved in a dispute between two private parties.
He said Mr.
Dutt is being targeted as there is no direct involvement of the CBIs SP and nothing has been recovered from him.
You (CBI) are diluting the important investigation which the whole country is seeing...You are diluting the probe which is being monitored by the Supreme Court, the counsel said.
The agency has not shown the complaint of the concerned SHO who was allegedly pressurised, he said.
He also said the facts shows that it was not a trap as claimed by CBI.
CBI has not adhered to or complied with any of the legal and legislative requirements expected in such cases, the counsel said.
Tanmaya Mehta, one of the defence counsel, said the CBIs investigating officer has not produced the case diary in a proper form and they have curtailed the rights of the accused after arresting them.
Mr.
Mehta also said no reason for arrest has been mentioned in the remand application submitted in the court for taking the accused in seven days police custody.
No reason to take police custody of the accused has been given in the remand application.
Why does CBI require police custody?
Accused are ready to tell this court what they have to say, Mr.
Mehta said.
The CBI prosecutor, however, argued they have recovered various documents and some cheques which they want to verify.
Regarding the arguments by Mr.
Dutts counsel that he was involved in the probe into the coalgate scam, the prosecutor said just because he is a senior CBI officer and is heading the probe into Coalgate, does it mean that he cant do anything wrong?
Do we want to arrest out officer without any proof?
We are also pained to arrest one of our own officers and we will not do any injustice to him.
We have been working all through the night, with the officers involved not even taking time out to have food or a bath, he said.
The CBI said the arrest took place on Friday night between 9 to 9.30 p.m.
The prosecutor said they have CD recordings allegedly containing their conversations and CBI need time to verify it.
The investigating officer told the court that sufficient evidence was found against the accused and thus they were arrested.
The Bharatiya Janata Party would go the whole hog demanding resignation of the Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, when Parliament resumes its sitting on Tuesday, for his alleged culpability in what has been named as coalgate scam.
The BJPs case is that since Dr.
Singh himself presided over the Coal Ministry during the time the coal block allocations were made, resulting in presumptive loss of Rs.
1.86 lakh crore to the exchequer, he cannot pass the buck.
Some quarters in the party suggested that a privilege motion could be moved against Minister of State for Personnel V.
Narayanasamy for his reported comments against the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG).
However, a senior leader said that at this stage the party would focus exclusively on the Prime Minister.
The party has already gathered plenty of material on the coal block allocations and it was on the basis of the evidence the party MP Prakash Javdekar had petitioned the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), seeking a probe into the issue.
The CVC has already asked the CBI to look into the alleged losses suffered by the exchequer in allocation of coal blocks between 2006 and 2009.
A CAG report tabled in Parliament is referred to the Public Accounts Committee for examination and comments and since the body has representation of all parties, normally the issue can not be raised till the PAC submits its report.However, the BJPs contention is that much of the material presented by the CAG is in public domain and the conclusions drawn by the CAG report justify raising the subject in Parliament.
Even as the Supreme Court is chiding the Central Bureau of Investigation over shoddy investigation in the multi-crore coal scam and unruly scenes becoming a regular feature at the ongoing Parliament session over the same issue, a documentary released in the Capital recently questioned the countrys over-reliance on coal as a power generator and its various negative consequences.
Journalist Paranjoy Guha Thakurtas documentary film Coal Curse is a 43-minute expose of the political economy of coal in contemporary India, focusing on the issue of corruption as exposed by the Coalgate scam.
It then moves on to observe the micro-level consequences of coal mining in the Singrauli region in Central India, telling the story of displacement, devastation and despair.
It questions the glaring paradox in Indias electricity hub, Singrauli, from where big cities like Delhi draw close to 15 per cent of their electricity needs.
Coal is basic to the working of the economy but it comes at a grave cost and the consequences of coal mining can be seen in Singrauli where the livelihoods of many, especially those belonging to indigenous tribal communities have been irreparably damaged by coal mining.
Singrauli as it exists today has become a metaphor for much of what has gone wrong with Indias development paradigm, says Mr. Thakurta.
A debate on the issue of corruption followed the screening of the film.
Former Coal Secretary P.C.
Parakh, considered as a whistleblower of the Coalgate scam, said during his tenure as the Coal Secretary, he had made the proposal for a transparent bidding system for allocation of the coal blocks and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, as the then Union Minister of Coal, approved it.
However, both the then Ministers of State for Coal Dasari Narayan Rao and then Shibu Soren (who subsequently returned as the Cabinet Minister) were not in favour of open bidding and repeatedly tried to scuttle the proposal. In my view, there was an attempt to keep the bidding system in suspended animation till all the good blocks have been allocated and nothing worthwhile is left to be given through bidding, he remarked.
Energy solutions were also discussed by the panellists highlighting the fact that the primary roadblock impeding investments of scale in the renewable energy sector is a serious policy lacuna, rather than technical issues.
The point that the important role of energy efficiency in bringing down the demand for coal has been left largely unexplored by the government was also raised during the debate.
Former Union Power Minister Suresh Prabhu, former Secretary to Finance and Power Ministries EAS Sarma, lawyer-activist Prashant Bhushan, former Advisor to Planning Commission Shekhar Singh, head of the Climate and Energy campaign in Greenpeace India Vinuta Gopal were part of the panel discussion.
The country is poised at a juncture where it can make a choice on the type of energy infrastructure it wants to invest in for the future.
The era of cheap coal is over.
With renewable energy prices dropping and the price of coal constantly on the rise, the differences between the two are quickly evening out.
Aiming to achieve its twin objective of providing energy access to over 300 million people who have no access to electricity and to sustain its long-term economic growth aspiration, India needs to diversify its energy generation by mainstreaming renewable energy combined with energy efficiency measures.
Given the energy security and energy independence that only renewable energy can offer us, and the destruction that coal mining wreaks, the answer seems obvious, Arundhati Muthu, climate and energy campaigner, Greenpeace India said.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) may question Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik regarding allocation of coal blocks to Aditya Birla groups Hindalco.
CBI officials, however, said a decision to this effect is yet to be taken.
They said Patnaik could be questioned if there was a need to know why he recommended Hindalco for the coal blocks.
Sources said Patnaik had recommended a re-look into the 25th screening committees decision to deny coal blocks to Hindalco in 2005.
Former coal secretary P C Parakh kicked up a political storm with his comment that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh should also be booked since it was he who finally decided to reverse the committees decision and allot coal blocks to Hindalco.
CBI sources said the agency would question Birla and Parakh, but it could take some time as it first wanted to examine documents to gather material evidence.
The agency named people in the FIR on the basis of prima facie evidence, they said.
CBI Director Ranjit Sinha said the case was being monitored by the Supreme Court.
All details will be provided in a status report, to be filed later this month. We registered the FIR on the basis of available material during preliminary enquiry.
Further evidence would be gathered during further probe, he said.
V Narayanasamy, Minister of State in the Prime Minister's Office, said the government had nothing to hide.
The coal blocks were allotted to public and private sector companies on the basis of recommendations of states. We have made it very clear that the allocations were made to public sector undertakings and also some private companies on recommendations of state governments, he said.
Narayanasamy, who is in charge of the Ministry of Personnel, which handles the investigating agency, said the committee comprised chief secretaries of the states where coal blocks were available.
He, however, did not comment on Parakhs jibe at the prime minister.
The CBI also claimed to have made a fresh recovery from Aditya Birla group, including retail invoice of gold coins to the tune of Rs 94 lakh, investments in various schemes to the tune of Rs 17 lakh and Rs 24 lakh petty cash.
The agency has already handed over to the Income Tax department Rs 25 crore which was recovered on Tuesday in a raid at Hindalcos New Delhi office.
The Bharatiya Janata Party on Wednesday renewed its demand for the resignation of the Prime Minister stating that Manmohan Singh cannot escape responsibility for having signed the contract for the allotment of coal blocks to the Kumar Mangalam Birla-owned Hindalco.
The opposition partys call came in the wake of a remark by former coal secretary P C Parakh, a whistleblower-turned-accused in the case, that the prime minister should be made a co-accused if the CBI has booked him for favouring an industrialist in giving contracts.
"Today, a surprising development has taken place where, in a bizarre instance, an FIR has been lodged against the officer who suggested that the auction route should be adopted in coal block allocations and even prepared a Cabinet note on it," BJP spokesperson Prakash Javadekar told reporters.
The BJP was of the view that had the UPA government agreed to Parakhs 2004 proposal the scam would not have happened.
But the Singh government held back the Cabinet note to allow the arbitrary allotment of coal blocks, it believes.
Right from day one, the BJP has been demanding the resignation of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh as he was the then Coal Minister under whose signature and seal the monumental scam happened.
In the bizarre allotment, neither the state exchequer got any benefit nor did the ultimate consumer receive any benefit by way of cheap power.
The only beneficiary seems to be the ruling party.
This is the monumental corruption which the Congress-led government is desperately trying now to cover up, the BJP MP charged.
The BJP wanted to know why no action was being taken against the PM?who had signed the contract papers when, in the Commonwealth Games scam, the final signatory was held accountable.
The BJP also targeted the CBI for adopting a selective probe in the case.
The party wanted to know why former Minister of State for Coal Dasari Narayan Rao, who is an accused in one of the Coalgate cases, was not even questioned.
"The Supreme Court had called CBI a caged parrot.
In Railgate, it had made the one who committed the scam a witness," Javadekar said, accusing the CBI of sparing the real culprits in the scam.
While the UPA ministers have been defending business magnate Kumar Mangalam Birla, the BJP has come to the defence of Parakh.
The Left has demanded a speedy probe but is not satisfied with the way the PM has handled the Coalgate scandal.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has booked cases against Aditya Birla Group chairman Kumar Mangalam Birla and former coal secretary P C Parekh on charges of criminal conspiracy and corruption in the multi-crore coal block allocation scam.
This is the 14th case in the controversial allocation that rocked the country.
After registering the fresh FIR, the CBI conducted searches at six locations in Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad and Bhubaneshwar and the residence of Parekh in Secunderabad.
Birla is the second prominent businessman to be named in an FIR after Congress MP Naveen Jindal, who is also an industrialist.
Birla has been booked as the representative of Aditya Birla Group and his group company Hindalco, an aluminium maker, for alleged corruption in the allocation of two coal blocks in Talabira in Odisha, which was allotted to it on November 10, 2005, senior CBI officials said.
Birla may be called in for questioning soon, officials said.
During 2005, according to a statement issued by the CBI, the said persons in criminal conspiracy with one another and then public servants by abusing their positions as such showed undue favour to an Odisha-based industry in allocation of Talabira II and Talabira III coal blocks along with a Public Sector Undertaking of Tamil Nadu.
The coal blocks were allocated for power production.
The officials said Hindalco did not fulfil requirements of coal block but was unduly favoured by the government.
The block was meant for PSUs only but a decision was taken in favour of Hindalco after Birla had a meeting with Parekh, they said.
The Birla Group has refuted the allegations of any wrongdoing. This relates to media reports on an FIR naming Hindalco and our chairman on the coal issue.
Apparently, this seems to be part of a larger case entailing coal allocation to companies, and being one of the companies, we are being investigated also.
We wish to state unambiguously that we have followed every process required for allocation of coal completely, as stipulated by the government policy, a statement issued by Hindalco said.
The FIR registered by the CBI has said that Neyveli Lignite Limited was to be given Talabira II block but Parekh allegedly favoured Hindalco and allowed it to share the block with Neyveli.
The CBI could not calculate the loss to exchequer as the coal block is still not operational.Investigators said the CBI is investigating the quid pro quo between Birla and Parekh.
The undue favours shown to the Birlas resulted in loss to the exchequer.
While this case is the first to be registered in connection with allocations between 1993 and 2005, the previous 13 FIRs registered by the agency were from the enquiry, which looked into allocations made during the period 2006-09 when Prime Minister Manmohan Singh was in charge of the Coal Ministry.
The Centre and the CBI have been rebuked by Supreme Court for its handling of the case.
The missing files and the alleged non-cooperation of the Coal Ministry had been deliberated by the Supreme Court during the hearing of the case.
The UPA government may be subject to major embarrassment in connection with the coal blocks allotment scam as the Central Bureau of Investigation is expected to inform the Supreme Court that the status report it submitted last month was vetted by Law Minister Ashwani Kumar and officials of PMO.
At least five crucial files related to allotment of coal blocks during 2006-09 have not been received by CBI which has again communicated to the Coal Ministry to make them available as soon as possible.
CBI sources said despite being given the specifics of the files they are yet to be furnished to the agency to expedite the probe in the coal allocation scam.
The agency has so far registered 13 cases related to allotment of coal blocks during the period 2006-09 for alleged misrepresentation of facts by the beneficiaries while applying of the blocks.
The sources said they are planning to register more cases in connection with its preliminary enquiry which relates to alleged irregularities in the allocation of coal blocks during the period.
The Ministry had recently informed a Parliamentary committee that it is trying to locate lost and missing files on coal block allocation in the wake of Supreme Court slamming the Centre for not helping CBI with documents in its probe.
The sources in CBI said they had received a letter from Coal Secretary S K Srivastava addressed to the Director CBI seeking details of the files which it requires for its probe.
They said they would again be giving details of the files soon to the Ministry.
The agency is facing another problem with regards to its separate enquiry in the coal blocks allocated through Joint Venture routes as 19 of the 20 state governments it approached have not given their consent to probe the irregularities.
In its status report filed on March 8 before the Supreme Court, the CBI had said that the coal blocks allocation during 2006-09 was done without verifying the credentials of companies which allegedly misrepresented facts about themselves and no rationale was given by the Coal Ministry in giving coal blocks to them.
Former minister of state for coal Dasari Narayana Rao and Congress MP Naveen Jindal were booked by the CBI on charges of cheating, graft and criminal misconduct in the coal allotment scam.
The CBI, in its FIR, alleged that Rao accepted Rs 2.25 crore investment in one of his firms which it suspects to be a bribe from industrialist-cum-politician Jindals company as the transaction happened after he got a coal block in the Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Birbhum, Jharkhand, in 2008.
The CBI accused two Jindal firmsJindal Steel and Power Limited (JSPL) and Gagan Sponge Iron Limitedof getting Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block by misrepresenting facts when Rao was the minister of state for coal.
Rao has already been questioned by the CBI in this regard.
Agency officials also searched to gather evidence needed to substantiate their allegations against the Congress leaders.
The agency team carried out coordinated searches at the 6 Prithviraj Road residence of Jindal and offices of his firms in Bikaji Cama Place.
Apart from that, the sleuths also landed at the Telugu filmmaker-turned-politicians house in the Jubilee Hills in Hyderabad.
Rao was not available for comments to media gathered outside his house.
CBI sources alleged that Jindal firms had tweaked facts on land, water supply and previous allocations so that they could become eligible for getting another block for mining.
JSPL is accused of not disclosing in application form submitted in January 2007 that they actually had at least six blocks.
Instead, they wrote they had only three coal blocks.
This was a move, said CBI sources, to offset the possible government attempt of rejecting their case on the grounds of avoiding monopoly of single company.
In less than a year, the Coal Ministry allocated a block to JSPL in January 2008.
Interestingly, around the same time Jindals company New Delhi Exim also bought shares of Rao's firm Saubhagya Media, listed at Rs 28 that year, at a whopping Rs 100 per share.
Through this route, Congress MPs firm invested nearly Rs 2.25 crore.
New Delhi Exims account books showed investments as loans from Jindal Realty, which in turn had received the money as loan from Gagan Sponge Iron Limited to show it to be a genuine investment.
JSPL Head of External Affairs Manu Kapoor said in a statement: JSPL, as a law-abiding company, is governed by a strong ethical code of conduct.
This is an ongoing CBI investigation into coal block allocation.
At this stage of investigation, JSPL is committed to fully cooperating with the CBI.
Union Home Minister Sushilkumar Shinde avoided giving reaction on the CBI naming Jindal and Rao in their FIR in coalgate, saying law will take its course.
It is their (CBI) job.
I will not give my comment.
It doesn't matter.
Whatever position, if he (Jindal) is involved, according to law they should proceeded, Shinde.
Terming the CBI raids as too little and too late, BJP spokesperson Prakash Javdekar has asked the agency to trace the money trail in this case.
CBI today opened cupboards of Congress MP Naveen Jindal, who returned last night from abroad, after he was asked to join its probe in the allocation of a coal block to his company Jindal Steel and Power Ltd.
During the searches conducted on June 11, CBI was unable to complete its operation at Jindal's 6-Prithviraj Road residence here as some of the cupboards and almirahs were locked and they could only be unlocked by the MP who was out with his family at that time.
CBI sources said that a search team went to his residence this morning and searched the cupboards and almirahs in the presence of Jindal, who has been named in its FIR along with former Minister of State for Coal D Narayan Rao for alleged cheating and graft.
CBI had communicated to Jindal to join the probe as soon as possible since these cupboards and almirahs could be opened only after his arrival.
According to the FIR, JSPL and Gagan Sponge Iron Ltd, also a firm belonging to Jindal, had bagged Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Jharkhand in 2008 by alleged misrepresentation of facts when Rao was the Minister of State for Coal.
Within a year, a block was allocated to JSPL in January 2008, CBI sources claimed, noting that shares of Rao's firm Saubhagya Media listed at Rs 28 that time were purchased by one of Jindal's firm -- New Delhi Exim Ltd -- at a whopping Rs 100 per share with total investment of nearly Rs 2.25 crore which is alleged to be illegal gratification.
Head of External Affairs at JSPL, Manu Kapoor had earlier said, "JSPL, as a law abiding company, is governed by a strong ethical code of conduct.
This is an ongoing CBI investigation into coal block allocation.
At this stage of investigation, JSPL is committed to fully cooperate with CBI."
CBI claimed that JSPL submitted in January, 2007 that they had only three coal blocks with them whereas actually they had at least six coal blocks.
The sources said this was done to boost their eligibility for the Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block as the government was mulling to avoid monopoly of a single company by not allocating large number of blocks to a single firm.
They said in the account books of New Delhi Exim, the said money was shown as loans from Jindal Realty which in turn had received the money as loan from Gagan Sponge Iron Ltd to show it as a genuine investment.
Besides Jindal and Rao, CBI has also booked companies Jindal Steel and Power Ltd, Gagan Sponge Iron Ltd, Jindal Realty and ND Exim and Rao's company Saubhagya Media.
The Supreme Court today pulled up CBI, PMO and Coal Ministry officials for changing the "heart" of the coal scam probe report and directed the governments to come out with a law before July 10 to insulate the agency "external influence and intrusion".
Even as it came down heavily on these entities, the apex court also made a reference to the Union Law Minister Aswan Kumar's role in vetting the probe report and asked, "does it not subvert the integrity of the investigation if changes are brought in status report on the suggestion of Law Minister and government officers."
However, this apart, there were no strong observations against Kumar, who is battling to retain his position in the Cabinet, with the opposition demanding that he resign for vetting the draft report of the CBI to the Supreme Court.
The Bench wanted to know whether the Law Minister can ask CBI to show details of probe or status report in a case involving people of other ministries and the PMO.
During the three-hour long hearing, the bench was critical of the access given by the CBI to Shatrughna Singh and A K Bhalla, joint secretaries of PMO and the Coal Ministry respectively, to the draft probe reports.
"What business they (JS of PMO and Coal Ministry) have to go to CBI and look the draft status report.
What business they have on earth to go to CBI to see draft status report?
"How can CBI permit them to peruse.
Whether they took away draft report with them or not. next day, these people came and suggested changes in para 1.21.
PE 2 is the most crucial.
"These two gentlemen visit the CBI office and they were shown the draft reports on March 6.
They go back and on March 7, come back and say changes have to be done in two paragraphs," the bench said adding "This is something which is very serious".
The bench, also comprising justices Madan B Lokur and Kurian Joseph, said the agency should stand up to all kinds of "pulls and pressures" and not share its probe report.
"You (CBI) are not applying your mind in such an important and sensitive case.
There are pulls and pressures from all quarters.
You should have the capability to stand the pulls and pressures.
"Supreme Court has given you strength 15 years ago (Vineet Narain case).
You should make yourself solid as the rock but you are like the sand.
We want a very professional, very qualitative, very thorough investigation," the court said.
The bench, which accused the political executives and the officials of changing the heart of the probe reports, also said that as a result the "whole direction" of the investigation got changed.
"You could have said it earlier which is said now only.
A different impression has come out.
This is the position of the premier investigating agency in which we all take pride.
"The CBI should have stood up and denied the invasion, intrusion and incursion.
It is a total act of indiscretion.
The CBI director said in an unequivocal term that changes were made in para 19 and they were of significant natures.
"The entire direction of investigation has changed.
Now the investigation has gone in a particular direction," it said.
The court termed as "sordid saga" the sharing and alterations in draft probe reports and said the CBI has become a "caged parrot" which is speaking in the voice of its political masters.
"...CBI has become a caged parrot.
We can't have CBI a caged parrot speaking in master's voice.
It is a sordid saga where there are many masters and one parrot," the bench said.
It also took strong note of the transfer of Ravikant Mishra, the then CBI DIG who was in-charge of coalgate probe, to the Intelligence Bureau and asked the Government not only to repatriate him back but also not to disturb the 33-member probe team without its prior approval.
"Immediate steps should be taken by Centre and CBI to repatriate Ravikant Mishra, back with CBI for inquiry, investigation in coal block allocation case.
Director CBI shall ensure that 33 officials, including Mishra, are not changed without the permission of this court," the bench said.
The court, at the end of the hearing, passed a slew of directions and asked the CBI and the Centre to file affidavits.
"Henceforth, Director CBI shall ensure that in the investigation of allocation of coal blocks, no access of any nature is provided to any person, authority including ministers, Law Minister or any other central minister, law officers, counsel of CBI, department of Prosecution,CBI or any person or any officer of central government or any person outside the investigating team," the order said.
It also made it clear that no court except the apex court will be given the status report filed so far.
The bench also sought to know from the Government and the CBI as to whether the Law Minister has the power to see the investigation report.
"Minister is answerable to Parliament but the minister cannot intervene in the investigation...After going through the affidavit filed by the director, there are certain questions which require some debate.
The question is whether any person/ authority or Law Minister has any power under Rule of Business to share the report," it said.
The admission of CBI Director Ranjit Sinha that agency officials interact with government officials regularly drew the ire of the apex court which said that the job of the agency is to interrogate and not to interact with officials of suspect ministry.
"Does CBI interact or interrogate?
Is it some collaborative effort?
There is no question of interaction.
The question is that you seek some information and the ministry and the department is bound to supply documents.
There is no question of interaction but interrogation," the bench said.
Attorney General G E Vahanvati, who has been under fire recently after CBI Director and former ASG Haren Raval belied his assertion that he had not seen the CBI report, today tried hard to justify his stand.
"I have been defamed, attacked and a lot of things have been said about me.
I have to point out that till September 2012, I was not in the matter.
I came only in November and asked for the time to file the affidavit.
I had said that I had not seen the draft status report," he said.
Responding to his statement, Justice Lodha said, "You may not have been wrong but at the same time you should have explained everything".
At the very beginning of the hearing, advocate M L Sharma sought prosecution of AG and Raval for the offence of perjury, accusing them of making false statements in judicial proceedings that too before the apex court hearing the sensitive case.
The court, however, told Prashant Bhushan, who raised a similar plea, that this aspect would be taken up later as right now the bench was on the issue of probe in the sensitive case.
The multi-crore coal scam has cast a shadow on ambitious project of the State government to convert a stretch of a State highway into concrete road under public private partnership (PPP).
Abhijit Infrastructure, the promoter of the Karnataka Road Development Corporation Limiteds (KRDCL) Hassan-Chikkanayakanahalli highway development project, has suspended the work as it is mired in the scam.
The company is most likely to incur the wrath of the State government.
The KRDCL has sought the governments permission to impose a penalty of Rs 1.19 lakh per day on the company for breaching the contract agreement: the fund-starved company has suspended the project work for the last three months and allegedly breached the contract agreement on achieving half-yearly targets set for project implementation.
The company had started implementing the Rs 246-crore project on January 5, 2012.
The work went on smoothly till July last, when the allegation of the companys involvement in the coal scam cropped up.
The CBI, which is investigating the scam, has chargesheeted the owner of Abhijeet Group, Manoj Jaiswal, for alleged irregularities in getting coal block allocation.
The CBI is also learnt to have frozen the accounts of the company and hence, it has not been able to mobilise resources to implement the project, officials said.
The KRDCL has fixed half-yearly targets for the company for implementing the project.
Accordingly, it should complete 15.45 km of work in 180 days, 38.50 km in 365 days, 57.72 km in 540 days and 76.96 km in 720 days.
However, the company has so far completed only 2.28 km.
Actually, it should have completed nearly 50 per cent of the work as per the agreement, KRDCL Deputy Divisional Engineer, Hassan, Veerabhadraswamy told Deccan Herald.
The KDRCL, Veerabhadraswamy said, has issued about four notices for the delay in implementation of the work.
And Consulting Engineers Service Ltd, the third party agency to monitor the project, has issued nearly a dozen notices.
The company, in its reply, has been assuring the government that it will restart the work shortly.
The consulting company recently recommended that the project promoter could be fined with effect from October 2012, as there was a provision for cure period of about 90 days for the project delay.
However, the promoter has completed earth work on about 35 km and made preparations for laying concrete pavement on about 16 km, spending close to Rs 60 crore, officials said.
As per the agreement, the company has been given two years for road development and 28 years for toll collection.
If completed, it will be the first stretch of State highway to become a concrete road.
Besides, the promoter has to widen the existing 5.5-metre road to 9 metres and construct cross-bridges wherever necessary on the route.
The KRDCL had recently implemented a similar road development project on Waghdari-Ribbonpally State highway.
When contacted, KRDCL Managing Director R Srinivas refused to comment.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is expected to register cases against half a dozen companies over next 48 hours for adopting fraudulent means to procure coal blocks.
A senior agency official said separate cases will be registered against the companies.
CBIs decision to register cases for alleged irregularities in coal block allocation has come 10 days after the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) report tabled in Parliament on August 17, put the presumptive loss to the exchequer at Rs 1.86 lakh crore due to arbitrary allocation of coal blocks.
The countrys premiere investigating agency registered a preliminary enquiry (PE) in June this year after the Central Vigilance Commission forwarded a complaint by BJP leaders Prakash Javadekar and Hansraj Ahir that first-come-first-serve basis was adopted by the government to benefit some private companies.
After the PE or initial probe, the agency registers regular case (RC) if it finds sufficient material to prove prima facie that there has been commission of a cognizable offence.
The CBI is all set to register regular cases against nearly six companies armed with strong evidence of cheating and forgery while applying for coal blocks.
The CBI is scanning 1,422 applications received by the coal ministry from 146 private companies for the allocation of 64 coal blocks between 2006 and 2009.
Agency sources said the CBI will submit a report to CVC in the first week of September.
The raging controversy over coal block allocation, which is rocking Parliament, had its echo in the Odisha Assembly on Tuesday with the principal Opposition Congress moving an adjournment motion on the issue, reports DHNS?from?Bhubaneswar.
Though Speaker Pradip Amat accepted the motion, a debate was not possible as the Opposition and treasury bench members got into a verbal duel over corruption charges against senior Congress MP and former state chief minister Hemananda Biswal.
The Speaker adjourned the house for the day in the afternoon following repeated disruptions.
It is not yet known if the adjournment motion would be taken up on Wednesday.
The Opposition, particularly Congress, has been demanding the resignation of Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik after it became public that the Patnaik himself had written to the Centre recommending coal block allocation in favour of a private firm.
Both houses of parliament were disrupted Tuesday over the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) reportedly pointing to a loss of over Rs.180,000 crore ($40 billion) in the allotment of coal blocks.
While the Rajya Sabha was adjourned twice, first for 15 minutes and then till noon, the Lok Sabha was straightaway adjourned till noon.
Soon after the Lok Sabha met on the last day of the budget session, members from the opposition benches raised the reported loss to exchequer in allotment of coal mines.
Some members also raised the issue of a train accident in Andhra Pradesh.
Opposition members, particularly from the Left parties, raised slogans and waved a newspaper copy carrying the CAG report on the allocation of coal blocks between 2004 and 2009 without auction, which the auditor said resulted in undue benefits of Rs.180,000 crore to private parties.
Some other opposition members pointed to the train accident involving the Hampi Express and a stationary goods train in Anantapur district in the early hours of Tuesday in which 15 people were killed.
The agitated opposition members trooped towards Speaker Meira Kumar's chair and continued with their slogan shouting.
As her plea to let the question hour continue went unheeded, Meira Kumar adjourned the house till noon.
In the upper house, as soon as it met for the day, BJP member Rajiv Pratap Rudy urged Chairman Hamid Ansari to suspend the question hour to discuss the CAG report.
Ansari, however, ruled this out, saying:
"You cannot raise questions that are not listed."
Rudy was joined by other BJP members, including Prakash Javadekar, who flashed, what he claimed, a letter from the Central Vigilance Commissioner recommending a Central Bureau of Investigation probe in the coal block allocation.
As the din continued, the chair ruled that "nothing will go on record".
Defending the government, Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs Rajiv Shukla said the CAG report has not yet been tabled.
"Where is the report?
Report has not been tabled," he said.
As the opposition members continued with their protests, the upper house was first adjourned for 15 minutes and then till 12 noon.
Both houses resumed their functioning at 12 noon.
The coalgate resurfaced on Saturday to haunt the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government, with the Bharatiya Janata Party charging the government with vetting a CBI probe report on the scam in an attempt to save Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
The BJP also demanded that a special investigation team (SIT) should be constituted to probe the scam as the CBI has been compromised and also that Union Law Minister Ashwani Kumar who had seen the report be dropped.
The Congress, however, denied the charges.
Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha Sushma Swaraj tweeted that the government vetted the coal scam report that the CBI will present before the Supreme Court.
She was reacting to a news report published on Saturday.
This is very serious matter.
This is the evidence of governments pressure on the CBI to save the prime minister, she charged in her post.
The PMO and Law Minister Ashwani Kumar had reportedly accessed the status report and sought changes in it before handing it over to the Supreme Court, media reports had revealed.
Dubbing UPA a rogue government that is interfering in the administration of justice, Leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha Arun Jaitley said the UPA would not allow the CBI to function independently.
The CBI cannot find out the truth and even if some honest officer in the CBI tries to find out the truth, the UPA is a rogue government which will not allow it to operate independently, Jaitley alleged.
Persons named in the report should publicly speak whether this is true or otherwise.
The original unaltered report of the CBI must be made public and also placed before the Supreme Court, he said.
In a meeting with CBI director Ranjit Sinha some time back, Law Minister Ashwani Kumar is reported to have asked the agency to tweak the status report that was to be filed before the apex court hearing the coal scam petition.
Last month the bench asked the agency to file in writing if the status report had not been vetted by the political executive.
The Supreme Court is asking the CBI to submit its report and government is toning it down.
This is for the first time to my knowledge that such a thing is happening, an aghast Janata Dal-United spokesperson Shivanand Tiwari said when his reaction was sought.
CPM leader Sitaram Yechury also did not spare the UPA government and announced that matter would be raised in the coming session of the Parliament starting from April 22.
Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal, who was at the centre of controversy in the UPA-2 government, was non-committal.
The Congress was not perturbed by the controversy. There is no question of resignation of Law Minister Ashwani Kumar.
The Supreme Court has already asked the CBI to file an affidavit in this regard.
The CBI will file its affidavit and truth will come out, party spokesperson Rashid Alvi said.
The Comptroller and Auditor General had submitted a report to Parliament last year exposing a loss of Rs 1.86 lakh crore in the allocation of coal blocks since 2004.
The report had cast aspersion on the role of Manmohan Singh as he was the coal minister when the scam was brewing.
Competition Commission of India (CCI) member and former coal secretary H C Gupta, who is set to be questioned by the CBI in connection with coal-gate scam, has submitted his resignation to the government.
The resignation came soon after the Corporate Affairs Ministry gave a green signal to the CBI to question Gupta, with regard to the coal blocks allocation scam.
Gupta was the Coal Secretary between 2006 and 2009, the period which is under the scanner for the CBI for alleged irregularities in allocation of coal blocks.
Soon after his retirement as coal secretary, the government appointed him a member of fair trade regulator CCI.
His tenure was to end to early next year.
The BJP on Friday attempted to revive the Coalgate topic, alleging there was a huge scam in the cancellation of block allotments that are still to be mined well past the deadline.
The BJP held the coal minister and Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) responsible for undue delay in taking decisions against cancellation.
Party MP Hansraj Ahir, who, along with colleague Prakash Javadekar, is credited with exposing the scam, told reporters that there was a huge scam in the cancellation of the blocks as well, like in their allocations.
The coal ministry and the government had given three years and six months or four years and six months (in case of forest area mines) to companies for development and mining of coal from open cast and underground mines.
Our charge is that though most of the companies have not developed the mines nor started mining, their allotment has not been cancelled, Ahir said.
The rules point out that a bank guarantee of one years royalty should be taken from a company that wins allotment.
If the company fails to mine in stipulated time, the ministry has the right to encash 50 per cent of the royalty.
However, no action has been taken by the government, the MP said.
Along with Jaiswal, the coal controller, the coal secretary and IMG members are also involved in this.
They are all committing financial wrongdoings and playing a fraud on the country.
There has been extortion also, Ahir charged.
The BJPs move to file a complaint at different police stations in several states against Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in the coalgate scam has made the UPA government jittery, with legal opinions being sought on implications of the move.
It is learnt that the Ministry of Home Affairs had sought legal opinion from Union Law Ministry, which said that the prime minister does not enjoy immunity from FIR being lodged against him.
In a big embarrassment to the government in the Coalgate case, the Supreme Court today termed as "very disturbing" the CBI affidavit on sharing its report with the Law Minister and others and slammed the agency for having kept the court in the dark on the issue.
Hearing the coal blocks allocation scam case in a packed courtroom, the bench said "suppression" of the fact that CBI has shared its probe report with the government is "not ordinary".
A bench headed by Justice R M Lodha observed that there was a "very disturbing feature" in the affidavit filed on April 26 by CBI Director Ranjit Sinha and the agency must be restored to its independent position.
Sinha, in his two page affidavit filed in the apex court, had said that the agency's status report on coal allocation scam was "shared" with Law Minister Ashwani Kumar and senior officials of PMO and Coal ministry "as desired by them".
The apex court said that sharing of information with the government about the probe into the scam has "shaken the entire process" and CBI need not take instructions from "political masters" on their probe.
"Our first exercise will be to liberate CBI from political interference," the bench said.
In his affidavit, the CBI Director had said, "I submit that the draft of the same (status report) was shared with Law Minister as desired by him prior to its submission before the Supreme Court.
Besides the political executive, it was also shared with one joint secretary level officer each of Prime Minister's Office and Ministry of Coal as desired by them."
The CBI Director had also assured the apex court that the agency will not share further status reports in this case with any member of the political executive.
Sinha's affidavit had contradicted the claim made by Additional Solicitor General Haren Raval on behalf of CBI on March 12 that the probe report in the scam has not been shared with any member of the government and it has only been shared with the apex court after being vetted by the CBI director.
The affidavit was filed in compliance with the Supreme Court's order which, in an unprecedented move on March 12, had directed the CBI director to assure the court that the status report in the coalgate scam is not being shared with the government.
Today's hearing came a day after Raval shot off a letter to Attorney General G E Vahanvati in which he alleged that he has been made a "scapegoat" in the matter.
Raval is also believed to have accused Vahanvati of trying to interfere in CBI's probe report.
Earlier, the CBI and the Centre had clashed over the coalgate scam.
The agency had told the court that there have been "arbitrary allotments without scrutiny" in the coal blocks allocation during the UPA-I tenure.
The government had refuted its findings saying that the "CBI is not the final word on this."
In the status report filed by CBI on March 8, the agency had said that the coal block allocation during 2006-09 was done without verifying the credentials of companies which allegedly misrepresented facts about themselves and no rationale was given by the Coal Ministry in giving coal blocks to them.
Team Anna on Friday disapproved of entrusting the investigation of irregularities in the coal block allocation to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).
We have no faith in CBI investigating Coalgate scam because the CBI directly reports to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and is directly controlled by him.
The outcome of such an investigation is already known the prime minister will be given a clean chit in the end, Arvind Kejriwal told media-persons.
If the prime minister is really honest why is he scared of independent investigation?
Why does he want himself to be investigated by an agency directly controlled by him? asked Kejriwal.
Let the charges against all the 15 ministers be investigated by this special investigation team (SIT), he demanded.
Kejriwal also attacked Law Minister Salman Khurshid for refusing an investigation into the scam and said, Khurshid himself is one of those 15 ministers who have been accused of corruption.
He accused the government of using the CBI to pursue its political agenda,
Disproportionate asset cases are going on against Mulayam Singh Yadav, Lalu Prasad Yadav, Mayawati and many other politicians for several years.
However no worthwhile investigation has taken place.
But Jaganmohan Reddy, who is a political foe of the ruling UPA has been arrested in a very short period.
We need a SIT, which is completely independent of the government, to investigate allegations against the 15 corrupt ministers said the Team Anna member.
He rejected coal ministrys rebuttal and said, However, CAG has estimated this loss at Rs 1.8 lakh crore.
Who took this decision to forego this revenue?
Coal Secretary kept on opposing allocation of coal blocks through the Screening Committee method alleged the anti-graft activist.
The CBI?on Friday ruled out scrutinising the role of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in the coal blocks controversy.
However, the agency registered a preliminary enquiry (PE) into the alleged irregularities in the allocation of coal blocks to private companies between 2006 and 2009.
The CBI has registered a PE in this issue.
The agency will inquire into the allegations of irregularities in the utilisation of coal blocks, a senior official of the central probe agency told Deccan Herald.
The agency, however, clarified that it will not look into the policy matters related to the allocation of coal blocks as the officer asserted that probe would primarily focus on the alleged irregularities in utilisation of coal blocks by the allottee companies.
The CBI registers a PE to start initial probe before registering a regular case (RC).
A preliminary enquiry is converted into RC if agency gets sufficient material to show that prima facie there has been commission of a cognisable offence.
Countrys premier investigating agency registered the PE a day after the Central Vigilance Commission forwarded to the CBI a complaint of BJP leaders Prakash Javadekar and Hansraj Ahir in which they had alleged that first-come-first-serve basis was adopted by the government to benefit some private companies.
"We are happy that the CVC took cognisance of our complaint, Javadekar said, while responding to the developments in the matter.
In their complaint, the BJP leaders had said that the prime minister was in charge of the Coal Ministry when most allocations were made.
The complaint also alleged that there was a delay of nearly two years in auctioning process claiming that the ministry had done so to benefit some private players.
The complaint also alleged that the allottee companies did not start production themselves, but outsourced the operation to third parties at a premium and pocketed the benefit.
In his complaint, Ahir had alleged that 1,700 crore metric tonne of coal worth Rs 51 lakh crore was given almost free to private companies.
Ahir wrote first to CAG in 2010 demanding that it should conduct a "special audit" of the coal mining cases.
"We wrote again in March this year and the CVC replied to us on May 17, 2012.
We will now wait for the CBI to come out with its inquiry report," Javadekar said.
Meanwhile, the prime minister is understood to have briefed the Congress Core Group comprising party chief Sonia Gandhi and other senior leaders on the CBI beginning a PE in the matter.
Union Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal has refuted the allegation of scam and defended the mechanism adopted by the government in allotting coal mining blocks.
"There is no scam in the allocation of coal blocks.
The same principles are being followed in allotting coal blocks during the last 15 years for providing subsidised power to the people," Jaiswal told reporters here.
Business tycoon Kumar Mangalam Birla on Friday said he wasn't worried about the case that the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) filed against him in connection with alleged irregularities in allocation of coal blocks to one his group companies.
"I am not worried about the FIR... life goes on.
I won't like to comment.
There are many more things to do," television news channels quoted Birla as saying after a meeting with finance minister P Chidambaram.
The case filed by CBI has triggered a major uproar in the political landscape, with the opposition intensifying its attack on the government and the Prime Minister, who held charge of the coal ministry during this period.
Birla didn't give details of his meeting with the finance minister, saying they "discussed various things."
India Inc has hit out at the CBI for registering a case against Birla in the coal scam, saying such action would dampen business sentiment and affect growth.
The Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) have said such incidents were unfortunate and it would dent the national psyche and also dampen investor confidence.
The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) would hold nationwide protests May 4-5 against the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government over irregularities in coal blocks and 2G spectrum allocations, the party announced on Sunday.
"BJP has decided to take the fight against corruption from parliament to the people of the country.
The party will organise massive protests and dharnas in all state capitals on May 4 and 5," BJP spokesperson Prakash Javadekar told reporters in New Delhi.
He said the party would continue to raise the issues in parliament as well.
"We will continue to fight against massive corruption of the Congress regime and its shameless cover-up," he said.
The BJP has been demanding law minister Ashwani Kumar's resignation for vetting a CBI affidavit on the coal blocks allocation which was meant only for the Supreme Court.
The demand has been rejected by the government.
The opposition party also sought Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's resignation after former telecom minister A Raja alleged that the prime minister was in the loop while decisions were taken regarding allocation of the 2G spectrum.
With all eyes fixed on the crucial hearing in the coal blocks allocation case in the Supreme Court on Tuesday, the government appears to be bracing itself for a virtual repeat scenario which it faced in the 2G telecom and black money cases in the top court.
Faced with twin problems of breaking the logjam in parliament, the government is left with little option other than to agree either for a court-monitored investigation or setting up of an independent Special Investigation Team.
Government sources have indicated the governments readiness to agree for a Supreme Court-monitored CBI probe.
In the 2G case, the CBIs response had infuriated the Supreme Court as the investigating agency wanted six months to complete the probe.
The court was furious at no action having been taken for a year, despite the FIR having been lodged in October 2009.
Infact, a terse comment by the bench of Justices GS Singhvi and AK Ganguly about the slipshod probe into the case, which spurred both the CBI and the government into action, leading to a spate of arrests within a fortnight.
This was followed by the Supreme Court taking a similar tough stand in the black money case.
In July 2011, dissatisfied with the lack of seriousness shown by the government in bringing back huge amounts of black money stashed abroad, the top court had set up a SIT.
The court had appointed former Supreme Court judge Justice BP Jeevan Reddy and had directed the government to ask the members of its high level committee to report to Justice Reddy.
The government was not happy with the judgment, and its review petition is still pending in the Supreme Court.
Another example of the Supreme Court forming a SIT was in the Gujarat riots cases, where 10 major cases were handed over it following allegations of state police being biased.
A day after law minister Ashwani Kumar briefed his party and ministry colleagues on the "sharing of CBI's status report" on the coal blocks allocation scam, the Congress and the government on Thursday rallied behind him.
The first to come out in his defence was external affairs minister Salman Khurshid, who argued that the CBI under the present arrangement cannot work in isolation.
"The law ministry provides all logistic support, including counsels, to the CBI.
But this (sharing of report) is not as if the law ministry has interfered in investigations," he said.
A senior CBI official concurred with Khurshid's views.
"Unlike the election commission and the CAG, the CBI is not a statutory body and is part of the executive government.
So, it is unrealistic to expect that the CBI will act in isolation," he said.
Earlier on Friday morning, Parliamentary affairs minister Kamal Nath, Congress president Sonia Gandhi's political secretary Ahmed Patel and the law minister held an hour-long meeting with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
Briefing government and party spokespersons on the entire matter on Wednesday, Kumar had stressed that there was nothing wrong in his meeting the CBI director as it was well under his jurisdiction.
He further stated that the law minister is the legal advisor for the CBI under the existing laws.
The Congress also backed him.
"The law minister has repeatedly maintained that he has done no wrong.
We have no reason to disbelieve him.
He is an eminent lawyer and a man of great standing and great integrity What he has stated is fairly acceptable," party spokesman Sandeep Dikshit said.
There could not have been a worse turn of events for a government already on the ropes.
The Supreme Courts damning indictment of the UPA governments conduct in the CBIs probe into the coal scam has raised many issues which will cause, and rightly so, acute embarrassment to it.
It now transpires that the law minister, officials from the coal ministry and even some from the PMO had sought and made changes in the report that the CBI had framed.
The court has raised a number of vexing questions.
Did the law minister have the authority to ask for the report?
What were the changes that were made in it?
And most importantly, why was there an attempt to cover these actions up?
Any way one looks at it, the government has not covered itself in glory.
The court now rightly wants to know how many people were privy to the report on this sensitive and politically explosive issue.
By May 6, the CBI will have to provide information about all the changes that have been made to the original report.
It is either extreme political naivet or a reckless disregard for the consequences that led to the law minister and others to ask to not only see but allegedly make changes to a report which is supposed to be framed in a completely independent manner.
Given that it has been beset by one scam after another, the UPA government should have conducted itself with utmost probity and caution on this issue.
The law minister could not have been unaware of the impropriety of asking for a CBI report into a scam in which his own government is allegedly involved.
Yet, he went ahead with this, leading to the court now telling the CBI that it does not need to take instructions from its political masters.
Whether the law minister now goes or stays, the damage has been done.
The public and Parliament have the right to know what exactly transpired and what are the possible effects of the changes that were made.
The court has been unequivocal in stating that this has shaken the very foundations of the system.
And once again, the court has reiterated what has been a longstanding demand from many quarters that of autonomy for the CBI.
At face value, the law ministers actions suggest that the government has something to hide and that he was trying to contain the damage.
Thanks to this ineptitude, Parliament does not seem able to conduct any other business.
The UPA cannot be unaware that its second tenure has seen more Parliament time wasted than any other.
Yet, it is literally handing the Opposition issue after issue with which to put it on the mat.
The government, it would seem, is its own worst enemy at the moment.
CPI(M) on Friday attacked Commerce Minister Anand Sharma for his statements on CBI naming a leading industrialist in the coal scam, saying it was a "blatant" attempt to influence the case.
"It is shocking that a Union Minister, Anand Sharma, has come out in defence of a big industrialist claiming he is innocent in the case.
This is nothing but a blatant effort to influence the case and intimidate the CBI," the party Politburo said in a statement here.
It said Sharma's stand was "also to justify the covert policy of privatising the coal industry which is the root cause for the corruption involved".
Demanding that CBI should "proceed in the entire investigation and pursue the guilty without fear or favour", CPI(M) also sought "a thorough investigation in this case of allocating natural resources illegally to ensure windfall profits to certain companies".
"Since this involved the period when the Prime Minister was incharge of the Ministry of Coal, this aspect also needs investigation," the party said.
CBI has lodged an FIR against industrialist and Chairman of Hindalco, Kumar Mangalam Birla, and a former Coal Secretary as part of its ongoing probe in the coal blocks allocation case.
BJP on Thursday alleged that the trail of the coal scam goes all the way to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh since he was the final signatory for all the allocations and sought to know how Coal Secretary P C Parakh is being held responsible but not the minister who held the portfolio.
"The trail of the coal allocation scam goes all the way to 7, Race Course Road (PM's residence).
If in the Commonwealth Games scam the person who put the final signature was held accountable and jailed, then what is the reason that the Prime Minister, who held the coal portfolio, is not responsible," BJP spokesperson Shahnawaz Hussain said.
He asked if Parakh is being accused of wrongdoing because he was the Coal Secretary, then why is the Prime Minister not culpable?
Citing another instance, the BJP leader said in the 2G spectrum scam A Raja was made an accused as he was the Telecom Minister then why is the then coal minister and Prime Minister not being held accountable for the coal scam.
The main Opposition had demanded on Wednesday that the Prime Minister should tender his resignation immediately.
"BJP wants to know why PM is not being held accountable.
We will take this issue to the people most of whom are already aware of it by now," Hussain said.
He claimed this augurs well for the party as a wave is being built in its favour due to such scams and the charisma of BJP's prime ministerial candidate Narendra Modi.
"The kind of atmosphere we are witnessing today, BJP will not just cross 272+ mark (the majority in Lok Sabha) but get many more seats.
The polls have not yet been announced and the battlefield has not yet been set but it is obvious as to who will fly the victory flag in the next elections," Hussain claimed.
Making a stinging criticism of CBI and senior officials of the coal ministry and PMO, the Supreme Court today hauled them up for changing the 'heart' of the Coalgate probe report but appeared to have given a breather to the Law Minister Ashwani Kumar and the government for the time being.
Observing that CBI was like a 'caged parrot,' the court said it should stand up to all 'pulls and pressures' and not share its probe with anyone including the Law Minister.
In a significant order after a three-hour hearing, the bench headed by Justice R M Lodha asked the government to make an effort to come out with a law before July 10 to insulate CBI from external influence and intrusion.
It also directed CBI not to share any report pertaining to the investigation in the coal blocks allocation scam with any officials or ministers other than those in its 33-member investigation team and the CBI Director.
"The heart of the report was changed on suggestions of government officials," the court said in an apparent reference to the raging controversy over the sharing of the draft status report with political executive and joint secretaries in the Coal ministry and the PMO.
The CBI action had triggered a major political controversy with Opposition, particularly BJP, demanding the sacking of Law Minister Ashwani Kumar and resignation of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
As a result, the 'whole direction' of the probe was changed, the court said.
The court directed that immediate steps be taken by Centre and CBI to repatriate DIG Ravi Kant Mishra, who was the investigating officer in coal blocks allocation case and was shifted out to Intelligence Bureau.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Tuesday filed FIRs against industrialist Kumar Mangalam Birla and former coal secretary PC Parekh for alleged irregularities and criminal conspiracy in allocation of two coal blocks in Orissa in 2005.
Coordinated searches were carried out at offices of the Aditya Birla group in Mumbai, New Delhi, Hyderabad and Bhubaneswar on Tuesday.
The FIRs against Kumar Mangalam Birla, the chief of the Aditya Birla group, and Parekh are under the Prevention of Corruption Act.
The CAG, whose report on the allocation of coal blocks in 2012 led to the CBI investigation, had named Parekh as the whistleblower.
The CBI has now filed 14 FIRs in the case.
"CBI has registered a fresh case in alleged irregularities in coal scam against the then coal secretary, Hindalco, representative of Adita Birla Group, unknown persons and officials," CBIspokesperson Kanchan Prasad said.
A Hindalco spokesperson said the company had not received a copy of the FIR.
The spokesperson denied any wrongdoing by the company.
Hindalco informed the Bombay Stock Exchange:
"We wish to state unambiguously that we have followed every process required for allocation of coal completely, as stipulated by the government policy."
The company's shares closed 1.45 per cent up after falling initially.
According to the CBI FIR, in 2005, the "said persons in criminal conspiracy with one another (and a public servant) showed undue favour to an Odisha-based industry in allocation of Talabira II and III coal blocks, along with a PSU (Neyveli Lignite Corporation) in Tamil Nadu".
Kumar Mangalam Birla is the second major industrialist after Naveen Jindal, chief of the JSPL group, to be named in the coal FIRs.
The UPA government could be in for some major embarrassment in the coal blocks allotment scandal as the CBI is learnt to be inclined to inform the Supreme Court that the controversial probe status report it submitted last month had been vetted by Law Minister Ashwani Kumar and Prime Minister's Office officials.
Sources told The Indian Express that senior CBI officials, including director Ranjit Sinha, were summoned by Kumar days before the status report was filed.
During the lengthy meeting, also attended by some officials of the law ministry, several amendments in the status report were suggested and some also incorporated by the CBI.
"We resisted as much as we could, but yes, some toning down was done following the meeting," a CBI officer present at the meeting in Shastri Bhavan said.
Sources also told The Indian Express that the CBI's status report was similarly "vetted'' by senior PMO officials.
During that meeting, a team of CBI officers, which did not include Sinha, was present although it is not clear whether more changes were made in the report at this meeting.
The CBI's stand in the report, submitted to the apex court on March 8, differs from that of the government.
The report pointed out irregularities in coal blocks allotment made in 2006-09 during UPA-1, and said it was done without verifying the credentials of companies which allegedly misrepresented facts about themselves.
The government had refuted the CBI's findings in the court on March 12, with Attorney General G E Vahanvati saying the CBI could not be the "final word" on it.
But in an unprecedented move, the Supreme Court had asked Sinha to clarify through an affidavit if the status report had been examined by the government as Vahanvati, when asked, told the court he had not gone through the report.
Congress MP Naveen Jindal, who is likely to be quizzed by CBI which was has named him as an accused in its latest FIR in connection with coal scam, is expected to return from abroad only by month end.
CBI sources said they had asked for his early return from abroad so that the agency could complete its search at his residence but it has been communicated to them that Jindal is likely to return in the last week of the month and only then he would be available for questioning.
During searches, CBI was unable to complete its operation at Jindal's 6-Prithviraj Road residence here as some of the cupboards and almirahs were locked and it was told that they could only be unlocked by Jindal who was abroad.
CBI sources said today that the search team had no option but to seal these cupboards and wait for the return of Jindal.
They said Jindal along with former Minister of State for Coal D Narayan Rao were booked for alleged cheating and graft in the latest FIR registered by the agency.
The sources said JSPL and Gagan Sponge Iron Limited, also a firm belonging to Jindal, had bagged Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Birbhum in Jharkhand in 2008 by alleged misrepresentation of facts when Rao was the Minister of State for Coal.
Within a year, a block was allocated to JSPL in January 2008, CBI sources claimed, noting that shares of Rao's firm Saubhagya Media listed at Rs 28 that time were purchased by one of Jindal's firm New Delhi Exim Limited at a whopping Rs 100 per share with total investment of nearly Rs 2.25 crore which is alleged to be illegal gratification.
Reacting to the development, Head of External Affairs, JSPL, Manu Kapoor had said, "JSPL, as a law abiding company, is governed by a strong ethical code of conduct.
This is an ongoing CBI investigation into coal block allocation.
At this stage of investigation, JSPL is committed to fully cooperate with CBI."
Opposition on Monday vociferously raised in the Rajya Sabha the issue of crucial files of Coal Ministry going missing, alleging that it was a conspiracy to save the Prime Minister in the multi-crore coal block allocation scam being probed by the CBI.
The opposition sought to corner the government by demanding a statement from Prime Minister or Coal Minister on the issue.
Responding to the demand, Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs Rajeev Shukla assured the House that Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal will make a statement on the issue but gave no time frame.
Raising the issue during Zero Hour, Dharmendra Pradhan (BJP) said such an incident has never happened earlier and the government needs to reply.
"This is a very serious issue...Nothing can be more condemnable.
This is a conspiracy...It is an attempt to save the Prime Minister," said Pradhan, wondering if the coal department had a hand in missing of files to brush under the carpet irregularities by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, who earlier held the Coal portfolio.
Leader of Opposition Arun Jaitley said, "There are three powerful targets of investigation and suddenly the files are missing...the government must respond to this...Otherwise you eliminate the evidence and then say no crime is committed."
Jaitley said, "There are three important targets of investigation - the beneficiaries who benefited from coal block allocations, the screening committee which allotted the mines and the Minister, the Minister's office and the Prime Minister's Office."
As BJP created uproar over the issue, Shukla said, "We will apprise the Minister and he will make a statement in the House."
While BJP insisted that the Coal Minister or the Prime Minister should come to the House and reply, Deputy Chairman P J Kurien observed that the matter is a Zero Hour issue and the government is not obliged to answer.
BJP on Thursday alleged that the trail of the coal scam goes all the way to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh since he was the final signatory for all the allocations and sought to know how Coal Secretary P C Parakh is being held responsible but not the minister who held the portfolio.
"The trail of the coal allocation scam goes all the way to 7, Race Course Road (PM's residence).
If in the Commonwealth Games scam the person who put the final signature was held accountable and jailed, then what is the reason that the Prime Minister, who held the coal portfolio, is not responsible," BJP spokesperson Shahnawaz Hussain said.
He asked if Parakh is being accused of wrongdoing because he was the Coal Secretary, then why is the Prime Minister not culpable?
Citing another instance, the BJP leader said in the 2G spectrum scam A Raja was made an accused as he was the Telecom Minister then why is the then coal minister and Prime Minister not being held accountable for the coal scam.
The main Opposition had demanded on Wednesday that the Prime Minister should tender his resignation immediately.
"BJP wants to know why PM is not being held accountable.
We will take this issue to the people most of whom are already aware of it by now," Hussain said.
He claimed this augurs well for the party as a wave is being built in its favour due to such scams and the charisma of BJP's prime ministerial candidate Narendra Modi.
"The kind of atmosphere we are witnessing today, BJP will not just cross 272+ mark (the majority in Lok Sabha) but get many more seats.
The polls have not yet been announced and the battlefield has not yet been set but it is obvious as to who will fly the victory flag in the next elections," Hussain claimed.
The CBI Director today admitted before the Supreme Court that certain changes were made in the coalgate draft report on suggestions given by Union Law Minister Ashwani Kumar, Attorney General G E Vanahvati and the officials of PMO and Coal Ministry.
In its nine-page affidavit, CBI chief Ranjit Sinha gave details of the meetings which took place between the officials of the probe agency, the Law Minister, AG, then Additional Solicitor General Harin Raval and officials of PMO and Coal Ministry.
The submission made by Sinha contradicts the stand taken by the Law Minister and AG, who had refuted the allegation that they had suggested changes in the draft report.
The affidavit said the changes made in the draft report on the suggestion of the Law Minister and Vanahvati have 'neither altered the report nor shifted the focus of inquiries in any manner.'
Sinha also said that 'no names of suspects or accused were removed from the status report and also that no suspect or accused was let off in the process.'
"Majority of these changes were done by my officers in order to refine the report either on their own or in consultation with the ASG (Raval) and his assisting advocate or by Law minister.
Besides, a few changes were also done on the suggestion of AG and officials of PMO and Coal Ministry," Sinha said.
The Director, however, said, "It is difficult at this stage to attribute each change to a particular person with certainty."
The CBI chief in his affidavit also referred to certain changes made in the final status report on the suggestion of the law minister, the AG, and the officials of PMO and coal ministry.
Amid controversy raging over the missing files on mines allotment, the Coal Ministry on Tuesday said it is in the process of locating the documents and will update the CBI about the matter within 2-3 days.
"CBI has been informed about the documents that could be located.
Further, update will be furnished in the next 2-3 days and a detailed report will be submitted by September 13, 2013," an official statement said here.
"These documents are in the process of getting reconciled with the investigating agency," the statement said.
Earlier in the day Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal said:
"The list of the (files) which could not be located would be handed over to CBI either on Wednesday or by Friday.
"Then lodge FIR (against the missing files) or take appropriate action."
Meanwhile, the Coal Ministry today reviewed the efforts being made to locate the documents mentioned in the lists sent by CBI.
The meeting was attended by senior officials of the ministries of coal, steel and power among others.
The statement said:
"It is seen that the officers of the various search teams which had been constituted for the said purpose had worked hard including on Saturdays and Sundays to locate all such documents.
"These teams had searched documents in the ministry, in Lok Nayak Bhawan, in the Ranchi Office of CMPDIL and in the offices of Coal India Ltd, including its subsidiary coal companies."
Social activist Anna Hazare today demanded that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh should step down from his post, accepting "moral responsibility" for the coal blocks allocation scam.
"The picture is very clear in the coal scam.
The truth of the scam is coming out, so Manmohan Singh should not continue as Prime Minister.
He should resign accepting moral responsibility (for the scam)," he said.
To a question, the anti-corruption crusader said, "It is absolutely wrong to say that I am against Congress.
I have nothing to do with either BJP or Congress.
But my question is why BJP did not oppose the coal scam in Parliament in a forceful way?"
On Gujarat Chief Narendra Modi being branded a "communal" leader in certain quarters, the Gandhian said, "I have not come across any evidence suggesting that Modi is a communal leader.
But why to talk of Modi or Rahul Gandhi, the fact is as long as the Prime Minister is affiliated to a political party, the country won't get the right leadership."
"The right Prime Minister can be elected only through a direct election by the people," he said.
Hazare said he would not support the Arvind Kejriwal-led Aam Admi Party as it too is a political outfit.
Asked whether India too can witness a people's uprising like in Egypt, Hazare said, "If the Government crosses certain limits and remains oblivious to people's problems, the country may move towards the path of non-violent revolution."
Ruing the virtual wash-out of the just concluded monsoon session of Parliament, DMK chief M Karunanidhi today said a debate on alleged losses relating to mining of coal would have brought out the truth.
"One cannot help but suspect if there is no truth in Opposition (BJP's) claims despite Prime Minister's willingness to debate the issue.
People of the country would have understood the truth if government replied to claims of wrongdoings as alleged by the Opposition," he said.
Responding to questions in party organ 'Murasoli,' he said
over 70 per cent of business hours were lost in both houses of Parliament due to opposition stalling proceedings and bills like the one providing reservation in job promotions.
"While Opposition is repeatedly levelling charges, did losses to the tune of Rs 1.86 lakh crore really happen over coal blocks allocation ?
Only debate can ensure if the losses (if any) could be compensated," he said.
He also opposed any move to sell stakes in the Neyveli Lignite Corporation and requested the Prime Minister to intervene to prevent any such decision.
The Centre Monday admitted before the Supreme Court that it provided certain coal blocks to private companies for captive mining although these blocks fell in areas where the Coal India Ltd (CIL) already had existing leases.
Seeking to justify such allocations, the government, in its affidavit, stated that five such blocks were allocated under the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act.
However, it is a well-known fact that these coal blocks were acquired by the government under the Coal Bearing Areas (CBA) Act.
Hence, the Centre may find itself in trouble on Tuesday when the court examines its explanation.
A Bench led by Justice R M Lodha had to adjourn the hearing last week after the Attorney General sought some time to explain how certain coal blocks belonging to the lease-hold areas of the CIL were allocated to private companies.
"If these coal blocks identified by CIL and Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL) are part of the lease hold area of CIL, then how can further rights could be created in favour of other companies?" the Bench had asked G E Vahanvati, who requested for some time to file an affidavit on the issue.
In its affidavit, the Coal Ministry has now conceded:
"Out of 47 blocks allocated to private parties from 1993 till 2005, five blocks were located in an area where there was a subsisting mining lease or were subject matter of CBA Act notification in favour of CIL subsidiaries."
Further, the government has failed in adducing any information about three out of the five blocks, saying the information was still being sought.
On remaining two blocks, it has said in one case, a sub-lease was granted to a private company while in the other, the mining lease was surrendered by the CIL subsidiary and then the private company obtained a mining lease from the state government under the MMDR Act.
Unfazed by the Opposition attack, Congress President Sonia Gandhi today dismissed the demand for the resignation of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh over the coalgate issue.
"Let them ask" was the terse response of Gandhi when approached by reporters on the issue after a meeting of the Congress Core Group headed by her.
The meeting of the Core Group was convened immediately after both Houses were adjourned over the issue for half an hour in the morning.
The meeting, which was also attended by Parliamentary Affairs Minister Kamal Nath discussed the strategy ahead in wake of the Opposition reviving its attack on the government on the coalgate issue and bringing the Prime Minister as well under the target.
Keeping up the heat on the government, BJP today demanded resignation of Prime Minister on the coalgate issue.
Gandhi had yesterday also given an indication of the aggression in Congress' response to the Opposition's charges.
Addressing an alumni meet of NSU, she had asked partymen to fight back by not allowing its opponents "to get away with propagating negative impressions".
"Why should we allow our opponents to get away with propagating negative impressions?
You should ask them: "what have you or your party done to change things in our country ?"
I have no doubt that they have no credible answer," Gandhi
had said.
In the Lok Sabha today, soon after Speaker Meira Kumar made a reference to Panchayati Raj Day, opposition members rushed to the Well raising slogans and waving placards on various issues.
BJP members rushed to the Well demanding resignation of the Prime Minister over the issue of coal block allocations.
Shouting slogans, they also demanded dismissal of Law Minister Ashwani Kumar who is alleged to have vetted the CBI report to the Supreme Court.
BJP spokesperson and former MP Kirit Somaiya has alleged that Congress MP Vijay Darda is involved in the coal mine allocation scam.
Somaiya alleged that Darda's companies had formed joint ventures with companies belonging to friends and relatives of Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal and that Jaiswal's influence was exerted to allot nine coal blocks to these companies from 2006-2008.
Darda refuted the charges, saying Somaiya's "so-called unearthing of scam was not based on facts."
Somaiya claimed that joint ventures Jawaharlal Darda Yavatmal Energy, JAS Infrastructure and Power, Jayaswal Neco, Abhijeet Infrastructure and so on were allocated coal blocks at Fatehpur and Gare Palma in Chhattisgarh and Sasai, Brinda, Moitra and Meral in Jharkhand.
"The total estimated current value of these coal blocks is up to Rs 25,000 crore.
These blocks have been allotted in a non-transparent and scandalous manner.
Vijay Darda and family are in JV with the Jayaswal Group of Companies and have got these contracts by creating an artificial net of companies to deceive people," said Somaiya.
Darda, however, said that his family quit the company after it did not get the coal blocks in Yavatmal.
"In 2006 when there was a severe deficit in the supply of power, cement and steel, the central government had started a scheme to attract private players.
In 2007, I signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the then chief minister late Vilasrao Deshmukh in which I stated that if I get coal for power generation, I will provide free electricity to farmers in Yavatmal for five years as the region recorded the maximum number of farmer suicides.
I also said private companies would be sold power at Rs 2 a unit instead of the then rate of Rs 2.4.
For reasons I cannot disclose, I did not get the coalfield in Yavatmal but instead in Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand, which defeated the purpose.
Thus, our family quit the company," said Darda.
Attacking the Centre on the coal allocation controversy, Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi today said the scam was "blackening the country's face".
"On the lines of Gujarat, the Centre had decided to distribute soil health cards to farmers.
I don't know when they are going to do this.
They are stuck in coal (scam)," Modi said, addressing a national convention on agri-business here.
"The scam is blackening the country's face, as Delhi has got mired in coal."
The Chief Minister also claimed that Gujarat was the only state where industrial and agricultural development were taking place simultaneously.
"National average of agriculture growth is 2-3 per cent, but Gujarat has grown at 10 per cent in the last decade," Modi said.
In the last ten years, seven lakh hectares of land was brought under micro-irrigation in the state, whereas only a thousand hectares had been brought under micro-irrigation in the previous 40 years, he said.
Farmers from several states attended the convention.
Modi announced that Gujarat would organize 'international agri fair' every three years, on the lines of 'Agritech' in Israel, where latest technology and global trends would be showcased.
Modi also announced that an agricultural institute would be set up in Gujarat in collaboration with Israel.
"The degree of an Israeli university would be awarded to the students," he said.
Speaking on this occasion, Israel Counsel General Orna Sagi said her country was celebrating 20 years of bilateral trade relations with India.
"In 1992, the bilateral trade with India was USD 180 million, and today it is USD 5 billion.
Agriculture has been an instrumental part of this growth," Sagi said.
Sagi also announced that Israel would establish three Centres of Excellence in Gujarat, for vegetables, mango and post-harvest processing of dates and banana.
The coal scam resurfaced today following reports of alleged government interference in CBI investigations with the BJP demanding an SIT probe into it but the Congress firmly rejected the charge and also ruled out the resignation of Law Minister Ashwani Kumar.
Leader of the Opposition in Rajya Sabha Arun Jaitley targeted the UPA by accusing it of being a "rogue government" that will not allow CBI to function independently and demanded constitution of a Special Investigation Team.
He also charged the government with "interference in the administration of justice" by not allowing CBI to acquaint the apex court with the full truth in the case.
"CBI cannot find out the truth and even if some honest officer in the CBI tries to find out the truth, the UPA is a rogue government which will not allow it to operate
independently," Jaitley said.
His Lok Sabha counterpart, Sushma Swaraj, criticised the government for "vetting" of the CBI report and said it is part of "an attempt to save Prime Minister Manmohan Singh".
JD(U) spokesperson Shivanand Tiwari also termed the reports as "very serious", saying this is contempt of court.
"Supreme Court is asking CBI to submit its report and government is toning it down.
This is for the first time to my knowledge that such a thing is happening."
The Opposition's attack on the issue came in the wake of reports that Law Minister Ashwani Kumar summoned CBI Chief and the report was changed and toned down after the meeting.
Unfazed by the attack, Congress rejected the charge of interference in the preparation of CBI report in the coal scam for the Supreme Court and ruled out resignation of
Law Minister Ashwani Kumar in this regard.
"There is no question of resignation of Law Minister Ashwani Kumar.
Supreme Court has already asked CBI to file an affidaviat in this regard.
CBI will file its affidavit and truth will come out," party spokesperson Rashid Alvi said.
The CPI-M on Friday accused Commerce Minister Anand Sharma of trying to intimidate the CBI by defending an industrialist being investigated by the agency in the allocation of coal blocks.
"It is shocking that a union minister, Anand Sharma, has come out in defence of a big industrialist claiming he is innocent in the case," the Communist Party of India-Marxist said.
"This is nothing but a blatant effort to influence the case and intimidate the CBI (Central Bureau of Investigation)," it said.
The CBI has lodged an FIR against the chairman of Hindalco and former coal secretary P.C.
Parakh in a coal allocation case as part of the ongoing investigation into the coal block allocation.
The CPI-M said it had been demanding a thorough investigation into the illegal allocation of natural resources "to ensure windfall profits to certain companies.
"Since this involved the period when Prime Minister (Manmohan Singh) was in charge of the coal ministry, this aspect also needs investigation."
The CPI-M said that minister Sharma's stand "is also to justify the covert policy of privatizing the coal industry which is the root cause for the corruption involved".
The CPI-M urged the CBI to proceed in the entire investigation and pursue the guilty without fear or favour.
In a swift operation, CBI on Friday night arrested its own superintendent of police (SP) heading the team probing the coal scam and an inspector for allegedly taking a bribe of Rs.7 lakh from a businessman outside the agency's headquarters here to settle a land dispute.
CBI's internal vigilance apprehended Inspector Rajesh while receiving the bribe on behalf of SP Vivek Dutt who was chief investigator in the coal blocks allocation scam case.
"We had information about such a dealing and we continiued to maintain surveillance on them.
After monitoring them for pretty long, today they were arrested for taking the bribe," CBI Director Ranjit Sinha said.
He said the CBI would inform the Supreme Court soon about the developments since the apex court had ruled that no official associated with the probe into the scam would be transferred without informing it.
CBI sources said the agency got a tip-off that Dutt, who was posted in its Economic Offences Wing, had allegedly struck a deal to settle a land dispute in return for illegal gratification.
They said Dutt had allegedly used his influence with Delhi Police officials to withdraw a petition from an ongoing land dispute case, which had benefitted the businessman.
The vigilance officials got the tip off that the alleged deal would materialise this evening and informed the CBI director about it who gave the go-ahead.
The agency's internal vigilance then arrested Rajesh when the money was changing hands.
Later, Dutt was also taken into custody.
The agency sources said the bribery case had nothing to do with the ongoing coal blocks allocation scam probe in which Dutt was the chief investigator.
The operation was carried out on a day when senior officials of CBI from across the country had congregated at the agency headquarters for their quarterly zonal meeting.
"My aim while taking over as CBI director was to ensure zero tolerance of corruption," Sinha said.
In another high profile chargesheet in the coal scam, the Central Bureau of Investigation has named Aditya Birla Group Chairman Kumar Mangalam Birla in its 14th FIR in the case.
FIRs have been filed against Kumar Mangalam Birla, NALCO, HINDALCO and former secretary coal PC Parakh.
Cases of cheating, forgery and financial misrepresentation have been filed.
CBI searches are also on in Delhi, Kolkata, Bhubaneswar and Mumbai in connection with the coal scam.
Sources say that in the FIR against Birla, the name of the concerned coal block in question is Talabira II in the Jasakuda district of Odisha.
This coal block was allocated in 2005.
The Aditya Birla Group has issued a statement saying, "Did not receive any FIR copy and there is no reason for it."
The FIR says HINDALCO did not fulfill requirements of coal block but was unduly favoured by the government.
Earlier Congress MP and industrialist Naveen Jindal was summoned by the CBI in September and was subjected to some intense scrutiny.
Naveen has been named as an accused in the twelfth FIR of the CBI in coal scan.
The CBI in its FIR has said that Naveen's company, Jindal Group, was not recommended by the Jharkhand government.
The FIR also accused him of misrepresentation of facts.
The Supreme Court on Thursday expressed unhappiness with the Central Bureau of Investigation's pace in probing the coal block allocation scam.
Pullign up the agency, the apex court urged the CBI to pick up some speed.
In fact, the court asked the agency to change gears and fast track the probe.
The CBI in reply assured the apex court that the probe would be completed in four-five months and it will complete its inquiry against 169 companies.
The Supreme Court also asked the Centre why an FIR was not filed over the missing documents even after three months and 29 days have passed.
The court said truth has to come out if it was an attempt to destroy the records.
The apex court slammed the government for not sharing files, documents with the CBI relating to coal scam.
The status report given by the CBI gives up-to-date details of investigation that the CBI has carried out till August 25.
The status report that was submitted in a sealed envelope runs into eight volumes.
The CBI had sought the Supreme Court's permission to share its probe report with its prosecutor in the case.
The CBI had also told the apex court that no prior sanction for approval of government is necessary to enquire against government officials in the coal scam investigation.
It had also submitted a list of petitions seeking more powers for the CBI.
The Centre on Tuesday admitted before the Supreme Court that 189 out of 236 documents sought by the CBI, which is probing coal block allocation scam, is "not-available".
In an affidavit filed before the apex court, the Coal Ministry submitted that an Inter Ministerial Committee has been constituted to "examine and review non-availability of any file or document" and to suggest appropriate action for locating them within a month.
Giving details of the missing documents, the Ministry said that 7 files, 173 applications of coal block allocatees/ applicants and nine other documents are being searched by it.
"Of the 43 files, 21 have already been handed over to the CBI, 15 are available for handing over and CBI has been requested to collect the same.
Efforts are being made to locate the rest 7 files.
"Out of 19 applications, 3 applications have already been made available to CBI.
The remaining 16 applications along with 157 applications are being searched.
Out of the 17 other documents, 6 have been supplied, 2 are available for handing over and 9 are being searched," the affidavit said.
The affidavit said that so far 769 files/documents/other papers in original have been handed over to the CBI for investigation comprising of as many as 497 files, 163 applications, 40 agenda papers, 10 feedback-form booklets and 33 miscellaneous documents.
It said that 26 CDs have also been handed over.
Main opposition BJP on Monday once again targeted Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in Rajya Sabha on missing files pertaining to coal mines allocation saying the scam is "monumental" and demanded that he clarify on it.
Raising the issue during Zero Hour, Prakash Javadekar (BJP) said two days back the Prime Minister said he was not the custodian of files whereas the Opposition believed "he is not only the custodian of files but also the custodian of the nation but not performing both the tasks well."
"It is a monumental scam and occurred when the Prime Minister was the Coal Minister...PM should give a statement on this," Javadekar said, demanding to know whether any FIR was lodged in the missing files issue despite the Surpeme Court asking for it.
Amid attack over missing files pertaining to allocation of coal mines, Prime Minister had on August 30 said in Rajya Sabha, "I am not the custodian of files in the Coal Ministry."
Dissatisfied with the reply, Javadekar launched a scathing attack on the government saying it "is doing a massive cover up" and sought PM's statement on it.
He said unfortunately the Committee, formed by Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal included a Joint Secretary level officer who is charged with changing the files with the CBI.
This is like handing over the keys of the treasury to the accused, Javadekar said adding, "CBI as well as the Coal Ministry has said before PAC (Public Accounts Committee) that all important files are missing...We demand don't keep such people who were instrumental in changing the files."
As he said that the scam has "smeared the face of the government" and continued to target PM, members from treasury benches countered him while BJP members shouted "shame-shame".
Ravi Shankar Prasad (BJP) joined Javadekar saying, "There was a discussion on it but PM's clarifications are pending.
This is a monumental scam."
Prasad said the Prime Minister should make a statement, which saw Minister of State Rajeev Shukla as well as some Congress members retorting that Singh has already replied twice on the issue.
Deputy Chairman P J Kurien interrupted saying, "It is not the fault of the PM.
PM had come."
However, BJP members kept shouting slogans like "PM jawab do" (PM reply) with Purushottam Khodabhia Rupala saying the party will continue to raise the issue of missing files till the time they were recovered.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has filed an FIR against the Jindal Group in the coal scam.
The FIR names Congress MP Naveen Jindal and former Minister of State for Coal Dasari Narayan Rao.
The FIR has accused Jindal and his company Jindal Power and Steel Ltd of misrepresentation of networth and concealing previous allotment.
They are also charged with cheating and forgery.
Jindal Power and Steel issued an official statement saying, "Committed to fully co-operate with CBI at this stage.
This is an ongoing CBI investigation into the coal scam."
This is the twelfth FIR filed in the coal scam and the investigative agency is reportedly conducting searches at 19 places in Delhi, Hyderabad and Kolkata.
The Congress MP's residence and head office in Delhi are also being raided in connection with the coal scam.
The Naveen Jindal group was allotted a total of 11 blocks, making it the single largest beneficiary of the controversial coal block allotment.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is expected to file its affidavit in the Supreme Court on Friday on whether the government misled the apex court on the status report on the coal block allocation scam.
While pressure had been building on the CBI to file the affidavit, the government had asserted it did not vet the the probe agency's status report.
All eyes are on whether the investigating agency will say that Law Minister Ashwini Kumar had vetted their coal block allocation report.
CBI sources have indicated to CNN-IBN that nothing will be hidden from the court - 30th April will be when the hearing takes place.
There were noisy scenes in Parliament on Thursday with the opposition gunning for Kumar and demanding that he take accountability and step down.
The opposition has also been stepping up pressure on the Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
Congress sources have said that contrary to reports, the Prime Minister had not asked for any intervention.
The CBI is set to tell the Supreme Court that the probe agency's report on coal block allocation scam was shared with the Law Ministry on its request and that Law Minister Ashwani Kumar had vetted the report, a charge the Congress has been rejecting.
CNN-IBN has accessed the details of the CBI's affidavit that the agency is set to file on Friday.
The CBI affidavit will also include the original status report on the coal block allocation scam, which concluded that there was a lack of transparency in the Centre's coal policy.
The role of the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) and the government in coal allocations is also part of the CBI report.
In March, the probe agency had said in its status report that many companies were given coal blocks through false representations and that there was no rationale for allocation of the blocks.
The Supreme Court had ordered the CBI not to share the report with the government.
It has also asked the Centre to explain why a small group of companies were favoured.
Top CBI sources told CNN-IBN that if asked, they will tell the SC that the Law Minister had indeed vetted the report on the scam.
Earlier in April, a report in a national daily had said the CBI status report was vetted by Ashwani Kumar and officials of the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) but the Congress had distanced itself saying the matter is pending in court.
Questions have also been raised about the Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's own knowledge about the entire coal scam probe report.
The main Opposition the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has been demanding resignation of the Law Minister in the wake of reports that he had summoned the CBI chief after which the report on the scam was "toned down".
Congress had rejected the charge of interference and has ruled out resignation of the Law Minister.
The decision by Central Bureau of Investigation to formally name Kumar Mangalam Birla, the head of a storied business empire, along with his company Hindalco, has caused consternation in India Inc.
Birla, 46, is widely considered a conservative businessman who plays by the rule book.
In the 2G scam, for instance, Idea Cellular, an Aditya Birla Group firm, was the only telco not to come under the scanner.
"It is ludicrous that an FIR has been filed against Kumar Mangalam.
He is straight as an arrow.
Our system is such that biggest fraudsters go scot-free.
I can give a many examples to prove this point.
The innocent people are the ones who are harassed," rued Deepak Parekh, chairman of HDFC.
This view was echoed by other industrialists, who apprehend that CBI's actions may have far-reaching consequences marring India's image among investors abroad.
"Kumar Mangalam Birla is one of our most respected businessmen.
I feel India's image as a good investment destination can take a severe beating if such incidents happen," warned Ajay Piramal, chairman, Piramal Enterprises, which owns a sizeable minority stake in the Indian unit of Vodafone Plc.
These views were endorsed by three ministers of the UPA government, who expressed shock at the development.
They spoke on condition of anonymity.
A Cabinet minister said CBI was now acting without any "checks or balances".
"CBI or such bureaucracy will pose problems for any government, whether this one or the next, as they are now operating without any checks or balances," the minister said.
Another minister said a witch-hunt was inevitable when profits become a bad word.
"Every investigating or audit agency is out to make a demon of anyone who is creating wealth," this minister said.
A senior Cabinet minister belonging to a UPA ally said naming an industrialist and not the company alone may create a problem globally as these entrepreneurs are now managing global assets.
"People should take care before naming an individual, as it has to do with the reputation and personal integrity of the person even internationally," he said.
TV Mohandas Pai, the outspoken former Infosys board member, said it was not right to "go after" everyone who has been allocated a coal block.
"It is not right to go after everyone who has been allocated coal blocks unless CBI has strong direct evidence.
In a system where justice takes a long time to come, their reputation is tainted till such time they can prove themselves innocent.
There are serious players who need coal for captive consumption and then there are cronies where there are charges of nepotism and bribery," said Pai, who is an investor in a proxy advisory firm for institutions.
"We should not second-guess CBI and justice must prevail, but targeting everyone without strong grounds will send out negative signals.
Industry will hold back investments for fear of being accused wrongly through roving inquiries," Pai said, echoing Piramal's fears.
Shock seemed to be the common sentiment on Tuesday.
"As an investment banker, I have done many transactions for Kumar Mangalam.
He has never suggested anything which is not in conformity with laws and regulations.
I am deeply shocked.
And this incident will shock investor confidence," said Hemendra Kothari, chairman, DSP Group.
"The Aditya Birla Group follows the highest corporate governance and ethical standards.
In our experience, these standards are set by Chairman Kumar Mangalam himself.
Hence, we are very shocked and surprised by the action taken by CBI," said Nimesh Kampani, chairman, JM Financial.
"I was shocked when I heard about it, and it is completely unexpected," said Rashesh Shah, chairman of Edelweiss Group.
The Hindalco share saw its biggest decline in three months to Rs 105.10.
But later, it recouped losses and ended the day at Rs 112.20, a gain of 1.45% from Monday's close.
"We wish to state unambiguously that we have followed every process required for allocation of coal completely, as stipulated by the government policy," the company said in a statement to bourses.
"Apparently this seems to be part of a larger case entailing coal allocation to companies, and being one of the companies, we are being investigated too," Hindalco explained to its investors through a one-page statement to the Bombay Stock Exchange.
CBI is probing companies after Comptroller & Auditor General of India said in mid-2012 that the allocation of coal mines without an auction had cost the government Rs 1,86,000 crore.
CAG said the award of mines gave undue benefit to companies, including Naveen Jindal's Jindal Steel & Power and Tata Steel.
Shailesh Haribhakti, a prominent chartered accountant, pointed out that Birla was on the board of regulators of institutions such as RBI and Sebi.
"We need to operate under clear policy guidelines.
It is indeed unfortunate that to begin investigation it becomes necessary to file an FIR against a person with a clean reputation.
Until recently, Birla was on the board of RBI and he headed the committee which drafted Sebi's report on corporate governance," said Haribhakti, chairman of DH Consultants.
The coal scam is set to get more embarrassing for the government as the CBI has filed two preliminary enquiries to investigate the missing files in the coal block allocation, a move which was avoided by the government for the months.
The results of the enquiries, if reveals uncomfortable detail, may lead right up to the doorstep of The Prime Minster Office.
"Our duty is too defend the Prime Minister Manmohan Singh but every action by the CBI should not be read as an attempt to protect him.
The procedure is being followed," said External Affairs Minster Salman Khurshid.
Sources in the CBI have told CNN-IBN that it is impossible to proceed the investigation without these missing files.
13 FIRs have been filed but there has been no chargesheet and no arrest as of now.
The files are so crucial that the sources are referring to them as 'the mother files'.
They are being referred as 'mother files' because these files have minutes of the crucial 35th screening committee meet.
It also has the final report from the financial expert from Coal India Ltd on the eligibility of the companies who have been allocated the coal blocks.
The files reveal details of the Coal Ministry's discussion on the financial strength of each applicant with a Coal India Ltd expert.
Without these files the CBI is not able to draw a procedure which was was used to distribute coal blocks and the companies, who have been allocated coal blocks were deserving candidates or not.
"The CBI is not filing an FIR, so that there can't be a through investigation in the case.
The two PILs doesn't give any convincing answers, said Nirmala Sitaraman, BJP Spokesperson.
The missing documents also include a letter written by Congress MP Vijay Darda, who is alleged of making recommendations.
The missing files will unravel a larger picture that how did the companies, which now have FIRs against them get lucrative coal blocks and who recommended them despite their shortcomings.
These missing files will expose that how India's natural wealth was sold cheap.
Congress MP Naveen Jindal was on Thursday questioned by the CBI in connection with the coal block allocation scam three months after a case of cheating and criminal conspiracy was registered against him in connection with securing a coal block in Jharkhand.
The Congress MP was served a notice to appear before the CBI and presented himself before the agency on Thursday afternoon.
Interestingly, the questioning was not done at the CBI headquarters to avoid media glare.
Jindal could not be contacted for comments.
The CBI officials said that Jindal Steel and Power Limited and Gagan Sponge Iron Limited, also owned by Jindal, had bagged the Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in 2008 through alleged misrepresentation of facts when Dasari Narayana Rao, also an accused, was the minister of state for coal.
In the FIR, it is claimed that the misrepresentation was allegedly done on three counts land, water supply and previous allocations.
Jindals company had allegedly claimed in the application submitted in January 2007 that it had only three coal blocks whereas it was in possession of least six coal blocks.
It was done allegedly to boost the companys eligibility as the government was planning to avoid monopoly by not allocating large number of blocks to one firm.
The coal block was allocated to Jindal next year.
Incidentally, one of Jindals companies bought shares from Raos firm at Rs 100 per share when it was actually Rs 28 only.
CBI has recovered Rs 25 crore 'unaccounted cash' during its searches here at the office of Hindalco Industries, which has been booked by the agency for alleged corruption in coal block allocation.
A Hindalco spokesperson, however, said he had no information of any such cash recovery.
CBI sources said soon after registering FIR against former Coal Secretary P.C.
Parekh, Aditya Birla Group Chairman Kumar Mangalam Birla and Hindalco Industries for alleged irregularities in the allocation of Talabira II and III coal block eight years ago, searches were conducted at six locations.
The searches were carried out in Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad and Bhubaneshwar.
The sources said during the searches at the fourth floor office of the UCO Bank building here at Parliament Street, the team found unaccounted cash of Rs 25 crore and incriminating documents.
They said the matter of cash recovery has been referred to Income Tax department for further action.
CBI has registered the 14th FIR in the coal scam in the alleged 'undue favours' shown to Birla by the then Coal Secretary.
The sources said the probe is monitored by the Supreme Court and CBI would be informing the apex court of all the developments that have taken place in its status report to be filed on October 25.
They said they have strong evidence to buttress their claims in connection with the case and the allegations would be probed further during their probe in the case.
CBI sources said they have slapped the charges of criminal misconduct on the part of the government official and that stands even if there is no quid pro quo.
The sources claimed that alleged favours shown to Birla in awarding Talabira II and III resulted in notional loss to the exchequer which are enough to book Parekh and Birla for criminal conspiracy.
Parekh and Hindalco have both refuted the allegations and claimed no wrong doing was involved in the decision.
The UPA leadership on Thursday asked its ministers to reassure top industrialists of the governments concern over a series of FIRs filed by the CBI against them in the Coalgate and 2G scams.
While commerce minister Anand Sharma and corporate affairs minister Sachin Pilot had begun damage control, government sources said parleys were being held with leading corporate honchos.
The government on Friday said it was aware Corporate Indias image was hit globally with top industrialists, such as Kumar Mangalam Birla, being made an accused in scam cases like the coalgate.
A senior minister feared that such actions and accusations would lead to a policy paralysis.
While commerce and industries minister Anand Sharma and corporate affairs minister Sachin Pilot have begun the damage-control exercise, sources in the government revealed that parleys were also being held with top corporate honchos to deal with the situation.
Industry leaders have met Sharma over the CBI action over the last 48 hours.
With the CBI terming the issue of missing files related to the coalgate scam as a matter of serious concern, chief of the probe agency on Sunday said that the Supreme Court would take a final view on the developments.
Talking to this newspaper, CBI director Ranjit Sinha on Sunday said, The matter is being monitored by the SC and the hearing in the case is scheduled on August 29.
We will file a detailed status report in the matter and it is entirely on the apex court to take a final view on these developments.
The SC has directed CBI to furnish a fresh report by August 29 on the status of investigations into the coal scam cases up to August 25.
Union coal minister Sriprakash Jaiswal on Saturday admitted that some files related to the coal blocks allocation scam have gone missing.
The minister said the files between 1993 and 2004 are missing. It is true that certain files related to coal block allocations, from 1993 to 2004, are missing.
We are trying to recover these files from the other ministries.
If they have the files, they should make it available, Jaiswal told reporters in Kanpur.
A committee headed by an Additional Secretary of the coal ministry is inquiring into how the files have gone missing.
It will also coordinate with other government departments for tracing their copies of the missing files, said the minister.
The SC on August 6 asked the government to make available to the CBI any file sought by it relating to the coal block allocations, saying that all authorities must cooperate to ensure a fair and impartial probe into the allocations.
Meanwhile, the agency is likely to register cases against senior officials of the Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh governments as part of its probe into the Coalgate scam.
The CBI today approached the Supreme Court seeking modifications of its order barring it from sharing Coalgate probe report with any government agency or officers and lifting of restrictions imposed on it from changing the 33-member investigation team.
In two separate applications, the agency said the scope of the Coalgate probe was expanding and 13 regular cases and three Preliminary enquiries (PEs) have so far been registered.
CBI cited various reasons including statutory ones for seeking modification of the May 8 order of the apex court that it be allowed to share probe information with the "appropriate governemnt/authority".
The CBI said that statutorily it is required to share probe information with the CVC and various government bodies including its prosecutors for purposes such as getting sanction, necessary government notifications and for strengthening the case with the help of experts so that the matter can stand the "litmus test" of trial.
"The scope of inquiries/investigation is expanding.
However, to comply with the mandate of the statutory provisions, it may be necessary for the CBI to share information with:
(a) Appropriate government for purpose of notification/consent under the Act
(b) The appropriate authority for the purpose of the approval under the Act," the CBI said
It referred to various provisions of its mannual and the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act by which the agency is being regulated.
The agency, in another application, sought the Supreme Court's nod to carry out changes in the investigation team on the ground that more officers are required in the probe team as the scope of the scam has been expanding.
"With progress on the inquiries in allocation of coal blocks, more investigating officers are required to be associated with the investigation.
Since two more cases are registeres after the last date of hearing, it is proposed to add one SP and two Inspectors to the team of officers involved in the investigation," it said.
The apex court while describing the CBI as a "caged parrot" had pulled up the agency for sharing information of its status report with the then Law Minister Ashwani Kumar and Attorney General G E Vahanwati.
It had on May 8 directed the CBI to ensure secrecy of its probe and not allow access of its investigation to any authority including Ministers, Law Officers, Advocates and Prosecutor of the Central governemnt.
The court had also asked the agency not to change the 33-member probe team without its approval.
The CBI said said that it needs to share the probe details with the law officers for getting their opinion for strengthening the case.
"This in-house mechanism of seeking legal opinion during investigation ensures that only those cases are sent for trial which can stand the litmus test.
Not only this, the scrutiny of evidence collected during the investigation by law officers leads to strengthening of evidence required for proving the commission of the offence against the accused.
It contended that during ongoing investigations, consultations with law officers were required for correct assessment of the evidence collected.
"Such considerations ensure that evidence to be sent to the court is legally admissible," it said.
"The present inquiries/investigations have ramifications not only in the area where the CBI has jurisdiction under Delhi Special Police Establishment Act but also in the jurisdiction of the state," the agency said.
"In these cicumstances, in order that the investigation proceeds efficaciously and all aspects of the matter be fairly and effectively probed, it is respectfully prayed that the direction dated May 8 may suitably be modified to exempt the CBI from disclosing such information as is necessary to comply with the statutory mandate," it said.
The agency said that the CBI Director be allowed to "dissociate" probe team member under "exceptional cirumstances" and he be also permitted to effect transfer of officer for administrative reasons.
"There may be certain exceptional cirumstances where a member of team is to be dissociated immediately.
It is requested that to allow the CBI Director to disssociate some member of the team in case of exceptional cirumstances the name of whom and reasons for dissociation would be intimated to the court in a sealed cover, as and when it occurs," the agency said.
The Centre on Wednesday faced the ire of the Supreme Court for not aiding the CBI with documents in its probe in Coalgate and was directed to file a comprehensive affidavit justifying allocation of 164 coal blocks.
The apex court, which perused the latest status report filed by the CBI in a sealed cover, said that the agency was struggling in its probe in the absence of documents not being supplied to it relating to the allocation of 204 coal blocks out of which 40 have been de-allocated.
A bench headed by Justice R.M.
Lodha said there was lack of transparency in the coal blocks allocation and "there was no system in place to verify the application of the companies and working of the screening committee appears to be sketchy".
"Regarding everything there is nothing on record.
CBI is struggling as there are no documents in its possession," Justice Lodha said, adding, "I am sorry to say that the Union of India does not have basic documents."
"Had it been with you (Centre), it would have helped the CBI in its investigation," the judge said.
The probe report indicated a lot of deficiencies and infirmities in the coal blocks allocation," he added.
The bench asked Attorney General G.E.
Vahanvati to respond to its two queries "why sanction of government is necessary in respect of court-monitored or court-directed investigation."
"This query is put to Attorney General in view of a categorical stand taken by the CBI before the Delhi High Court in a matter in which CBI counsel submitted that as the investigation was directed by the court, grant of sanction for prosecution is not necessary under section 6 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment (DSPE) Act," the bench said.
The bench also wanted to know from the Attorney General "why clarification should not be made that sanction for investigation of offences alleged to have been committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act is necessary from the government when the government's stand is that the power of supervision for investigation has already been shifted from government to CVC pursuant to direction issued by this court in Vineet Narain case."
The hearing in the matter was not free from controversy as Additional Solicitor General Siddharth Luthra, who replaced senior advocate U.U.
Lalit, withdrew from appearing for CBI after the Attorney General opined that no law officer should be involved with the agency in this case.
Vahanvati said he was not in the favour of law officers being engaged by the CBI in view of the controversy of sharing of probe report which forced the then ASG Haren Raval to resign.
He said CBI should independently choose its lawyer to represent it in the matter.
Investors of Navabharat Power Private Limited and Malaxmi Energy Ventures are under the scanner of the Enforcement Directorate in the Coalgate scam.
The ED recently questioned industrialist and film producer Potluri Vara Prasad whose PVP Ventures invested Rs 12 crore in Malaxmi, which in turn invested in Navabharat Power, which is facing charges in the Coalgate scam.
City-based top industrialists P.
Trivikrama Prasad, chairman of NPCL, and its MD, Y.
Harischandra Prasad, were also questioned by the ED.
Its finger-pointing time
In September 2012, the CBI issued a FIR against Navabharat Power and its promoters, alleging that Navbharat Power had made false claims and misrepresented facts to get coal blocks in Rampia blocks in Odisha.
The directors had connived with public servants, it alleged.
The promoters allegedly sold their stakes to Essar in an irregular manner after the allocation of coal blocks, it said.
Denying the allegations, Trivikrama Prasad said.
I explained (to the ED)?what happened.
Without my knowledge, Harischandra Prasad sold the shares of Malaxmi in NPCL to Essar Power Ltd.
I took up the case with the Company Law Board.
I am a non-executive chairman of NPCL and not involved in its affairs.
As the case is with the CLB, we decided to sell 50 per cent of our share to Essar.
It would be around Rs 170 crore.
He said, There is no violation regarding showing bank loans as net worth.
The promoters had entered into a definitive sale agreement with Essar in 2009-10 to sell their entire stake in due course of time.
In the annual return filed with the Registrar of Companies in 2010, Navabharat Power and Essar entered into agreements with the promoters for acquisition of their total equity, making Navabharat a wholly-owned subsidiary of Essar, he said,
But Harishchandra Prasad had a different story.
Speaking from Uganda, he said, I followed the board resolutions.
Trivikrama Prasad was the chairman and my role was limited.
There is no FEMA violation.
The ED said they were conducting an inquiry about the transactions with Essar under PMLA.
I answered their questions.
Vara Prasad said he was called in as he had invested in Malaxmi and had nothing to do with NPCL and denied any violations.
He said he had appeared before the ED on May 28.
ED has asked me questions pertaining to PVP Venture's investments in Malaxmi.
We invested Rs 12 crore in Malaxmi from April 2008 to November 2009.
This is one-and-a-half years after the coal block allocation.
We are no way linked to Navabharat Power or the ED case.
Malaxmi returned our money later.
We paid in Indian currency and we got the money back in Indian currency.
The Naveen Jindal Group had allegedly "misrepresented" facts and was shown favour by the Jharkhand Government which dropped other firms from its recommendation for allocation of coal blocks in the state in 2007, the CBI has said in its FIR filed before a court here in Coalgate.
The FIR is categorical that Ministry of Power was against the proposal for allocating Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block to Jindal Group firms - Jindal Steel and Power Ltd (JSPL) and Gagan Sponge Iron Pvt Ltd (GSIPL) - which have been named as accused along with Congress MP Naveen Jindal.
However, former Minister of State for Coal Dasari Narayan Rao, also an accused in the FIR, had written a note to the then Coal Secretary and showed "undue favour" to Jindal's firm which had misrepresented the facts regarding its "preparedness in setting up their proposed end used plant (EUP)".
"Enquiry further revealed that Government of Jharkhand vide its letter dated June 20, 2007 recommended the allocation of Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block to three companies namely, M/s Lanco Infratech Ltd (40 per cent), M/s JSPL (30 per cent) and M/s GSIPL (30 per cent).
"However vide its letter dated July 30, 2007, Government of Jharkhand changed its recommendation and recommended the allocation of Amarkonda Murgadangal block to only the two Naveen Jindal Group companies i.e.
JSPL (70 per cent) and M/s GSIPL (30 per cent)," the CBI said in its 12th FIR filed till date in the coal blocks allocation scam before the Special CBI Court.
The agency alleged that both SPL and GSIPL misrepresented the facts to the Coal Ministry but the Screening Committee, which used to recommend for allocation of coal blocks to the shortlisted applicant companies, in its meeting held on September 13, 2007, had recommended allocation of Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block jointly to these two firms.
"Enquiry further revealed that both M/s JSPL and M/s GSIPL misrepresented in its application/feed back form on the count of their preparedness in setting up their proposed EUP as well the previous allocation of coal blocks to their group companies," it said.
The FIR further said, "Despite not being recommended by the Ministry of Power and the companies having misrepresented on the aforesaid counts, the Screening Committee in its meeting held on September 13, 2007 recommended the allocation of Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block jointly to M/s JSPL and M's GSIPL."
The CBI said that Power Ministry had not recommended allocation of coal blocks either to JSPL or GSIPL as they did not "meet the criteria of preparation adopted by Central Electricity Authority which shortlisted the companies on behalf of Ministry of Power."
Regarding Rao, the agency said that in order to influence the decision of the Screening Committee in favour of JSPL and GSIPL, the then Minister of State for Coal had written a note on July 27, 2007 to the Coal Secretary, who was also Chairman of the Screening Committee.
Referring to the note, CBI said, "He (Rao) mentioned that he had come to know through the media reports that Ministry of Power/CEA had been appraising various applications received in the Ministry of Coal on the criteria of networth of applicant, progress regarding land acquisition and water tie up etc."
"However, the Screening Committee should evaluate various applicants as per the past practices."
It said on a representation by another firm Bhushan Energy Ltd (BEL) seeking 50 per cent share in Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block, Rao "again showed undue favour" to Jindal's firms and justified the decision of Screening Committee recommending the allocation of coal blocks to the two companies.
It said that JSPL had submitted its application for coal block allocation in January 2007 to the Coal Ministry for securing few blocks earmarked for power sector, including Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Jharkhand for its proposed 1000 MW captive power plant to be set up at Patratu.
GSIPL also submitted its application dated January 10, 2007 to the ministry for its 1000 MW independent power plant in Dumka district in Jharkhand, the CBI said, adding that the allocation letter was issued to the two firms on January 17, 2008.
Besides Jindal, Rao, JSPL and GSIPL, the accused named in the FIR, lodged under provisions of the IPC dealing with the offence of conspiracy to cheat and under the relevant sections of the Prevention of Corruption Act, are - members of the 35th Screening Committee, Jindal Realty Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Exim Pvt Ltd, Sowbhagya Media Ltd, Directors of GSIPL and other unknown persons.
Aiming to plug loopholes in the coal sector, the government will set up an independent regulator with the task of conserving resources besides charting methodology for fixing prices.
The decision to set up the watchdog, much on the lines of telecom, electricity and finance sectors, through an executive order is not unprecedented.
The government hopes Coal Regulatory Authority Bill, 2013 would be passed in the ensuing session of the Parliament.
"Pending the passage of the Bill, we propose to set up the authority by an executive order.
There are precedents for that.
The PFRDA was set up by an executive order.
It is still under an executive order.
SEBI was the first to be set up by an executive order then it became a statutory body," Finance Minister P.
Chidambaram said on Friday.
Last evening, Cabinet approved setting up of the coal regulatory body.
The regulator, however, would neither have the authority to allocate blocks nor determine the prices of the dry fuel; but would chart out the principles and methodology for fixing coal prices.
The much-awaited regulatory body for the sector, in which PSU Coal India is the dominant player, would specify methods of testing for declaration of grades or quality, monitor and enforce closure of mines, specify principles and methodologies for price determination of raw coal and washed coal.
It would also be entrusted with the job of adjudicating upon disputes between parties and discharge other functions as the government may intend.
Power firms have been demanding for setting up a coal regulatory body for a long time.
Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal said the main function of regulator would be to bring in transparency in the sector.
"We were waiting for (authority) for a long time.
I am happy that the Cabinet has accepted the proposal for setting up of the regulatory authority and hopeful that it (Bill) will be passed in Parliament as early as possible and it would be realised," Jaiswal said.
Hailing the proposal, industry chambers said this would make the sector more investment-friendly and encourage more exploration.
Reacting to the development, PHD Chamber President Suman Jyoti Khaitan said, "It is an inspiring move to embark upon issues of price determination, testing quality and monitoring the coal mines which would aid in setting a transparent framework to meet the huge demand and supply gap.
It will revive the corporate investments trajectory, he added.
"We welcome the move to set up an independent regulator for the coal sector and hope that this would make the sector more investment friendly and encourage more exploration," CII Director General Mr Chandrajit Banerjee said.
"The coal regulator will ensure transparency in pricing, quality and supply of coal," Assocham Secretary General D.S.
Rawat said.
A Group of Ministers had last month approved the bill for setting up of regulatory authority for the coal sector.
Settling the issue of fixing coal prices, the Group of Ministers (GoM) had in May decided that the proposed regulator will not determine fuel rates, a job that will continue to be vested with the producers.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) visited Congress Member of Parliament (MP) Naveen Jindal's 6-Prithviraj Road residence again this week as a part of its probe into the allocation of a coal block to Jindal Steel and Power Ltd, JSPL.
Having conducted a search of the premises on June 11, the agency officials visited the Jindal residence again on June 21 and opened some of the cupboards and almirahs that were locked.
The search was conducted in the presence of Jindal, who has been named in an FIR along with former Minister of State for Coal D.
Narayan Rao for alleged charges of cheating and graft.
The CBI had communicated to Jindal to join the probe as soon as possible since these cupboards and almirahs could be opened only after his arrival.
According to the FIR, JSPL and Gagan Sponge Iron Ltd, also a firm belonging to Mr Jindal, had bagged the Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Jharkhand in 2008 by alleged misrepresentation of facts when Rao was a minister.
It is not so much the details that are important, it is the fact of a prominent Congress MP and a former minister of state being jointly investigated for having entered into a conspiracy to bag a coal mine in the broader case that is now being frequently referred to as Coalgate.
The thrust of the CBIs efforts in this matter has already made people point fingers at several influential people associated with the Congress.
This has diminished the stature of the UPA government.
When the next Lok Sabha might be less than a year away, this can hardly be a solace to the Congress even if its top leaders are not involved in the scam.
The charge against Naveen Jindal, a Congress MP and a major industrialist with steel interests, and Dasari Narayan Rao, figures in a fresh FIR filed by the CBI in the course of Coalgate investigations, in which a dozen FIRs have already been filed.
As minister, Rao was in a position to influence the screening committee that gave away coal blocks, in many instances to companies that did not have the credentials or pressed their claims on false grounds.
Jindals application for the Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Jharkhand allegedly falls in this category.
As there are grounds to think that Jindals company was unduly favoured, there are naturally grounds to believe that this would not have happened without the greasing of palms.
When petty bureaucrats, contractors, minor politicians and punters and hustlers play this game, they can be marched off to the care of the law without fuss.
But when politicians and top businessmen are charged with serious offences, it begins to stink.
At this stage, no one booked by the CBI in Coalgate can be deemed to be guilty.
The investigative agency may well be floating on the basis of insufficient or shoddy evidence in some cases.
However, the direction seems to be clear.
Those with pull with the ruling parties at the Centre or in the states no matter which party governed them, and regardless of the period were able to land mining assets with relative ease.
This, in essence, is the real Coalgate scandal, and needs to be seen as something distinct from what the CAG pointed out.
The CAG had, in effect, questioned the governments decision not to auction coal blocks, arguing that the auction route would have eliminated hustlers.
But auctions can also be fixed.
The real point is that way too many small and big, and real and phoney, capitalists with the right political links hit the jackpot.
The government must facilitate the CBI investigation.
Former Union minister of state for coal and mines Dasari Narayana Rao on Wednesday said he is not Boggula Puli (coal tiger), but he is Bobbili Puli (ferocious tiger).
Reacting to the FIR lodged against him in Coalgate by the Central Bureau of Investigation, Narayana Rao, in a statement, refuted the allegations against him.
I have no role in these baseless allegations.
All the events are happening in a planned manner.
I am confident that the truth will prevail.
I thank my fans and supporters.
I advice them not to worry, Narayana Rao said.
The former minister and Sowbhagya Media were named as accused in the FIR filed by the Central Bureau of Investigation.
The CBI alleged that Sowbhagya Media got investments worth Rs 2.25 crore from Group Company of Naveen Jindal.
In a quid pro quo deal, Jindal was allotted coal block in Jharkhand.
The agency has booked cheating and criminal conspiracy cases against Narayana Rao.
After refusing to yield, Government has finally given its nod to CBI to question former Coal Secretary H C Gupta, at present a member of Competition Commission of India, in connection with the coal blocks allocation scam.
The request of the investigating agency to probe the role of Gupta was earlier turned down by the Government but now the CBI sources said Corporate Affairs Ministry has given the go ahead to the agency to quiz him.
The Ministry had refused to grant him permission even as the CBI reasoned out that his questioning was important as he was the Secretary between 2006 to 2009, a period which has come under the scanner.
The refusal of the Corporate Affairs Ministry has generated furore in political circles as BJP saw it as an infringment in the coal scam probe.
"There has been a crisis of confidence as far as CBI functioning is concerned.
Earlier, attempts were made by the government to interfere in its affairs when the Law Minister was found tampering with the status report on Coalgate...
Now it has denied permission to CBI to question Mr Gupta," BJP spokesperson Abhimanyu had said.
When contacted over phone, Gupta said he would not like to speak on the matter.
CBI, which is probing the coal block allocation scam, has registered 12 FIRs related to alleged irregularities in the allotment coal blocks between 2006 and 2009.
During this period, 68 coal blocks were alloted to 151 companies and files of some of them had gone missing.
In the latest FIR, CBI has named unknown members of screening committee as accused along with Congress MP Naveen Jindal and former Minister of State for Coal D Narayan Rao as accused.
Screening Committee which clears allocation of coal block is normally chaired by Secretary for Coal.
CBI today carried out searches at the residence of former Minister of State for Coal Dasari Narayana Rao on Jubilee Hills Road here and three other places after he was accused of alleged cheating and graft by the central agency in its fresh FIR in the coal scam.
CBI officials from Delhi reached the residence of Rao around 9 am and continued the searches till 3.30 pm, sources said.
The officials of the central agency, who participated in the searches, however, refused to comment.
CBI also conducted searches at other locations, including office premises of Rao's company Saubhagya Media, besides the residence of Rao's daughter here, they said.
This is the 12th FIR registered by the agency in connection with its probe in coal allocation scam, which also booked Rao's company Saubhagya Media.
The investigating agency has accused Rao and his company of alleged criminal conspiracy, cheating and relevant sections of provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
Rao, a former Congress Rajya Sabha MP and noted Telugu film producer/director, was Minister of State for Coal between 2004-06 and again between 2006-08.
He has already been quizzed by the agency in connection with the probe in coal block allocation scam.
Expressing concern over government not allowing CBI to question former Coal Secretary H.C.
Gupta, BJP on Tuesday said this is the second time that the Centre has interfered in coalgate probe after then Law Minister Ashwani Kumar 'tampered' with the status report.
"There has been a crisis of confidence as far as CBI functioning is concerned.
Earlier, attempts were made by the government to interfere in its affairs when the Law Minister was found tampering with the status report on coalgate...
Now it has denied permission to CBI to question Mr Gupta," BJP spokesperson Abhimanyu told reporters.
Government has turned down a request of CBI to question Gupta, at present a member of Competition Commission of India, in connection with the coal blocks allocation scam.
Latest reports say CBI is likely to make a fresh request.
"This is the second instance of government interference in the CBI probe into the coal scam.
BJP condemns this move," Abhimanyu said.
Kumar had to resign from the post of Law Minister after it was revealed that he had vetted the CBI status report on coalgate and made some significant changes in it.
BJP President Rajnath Singh had earlier demanded that since Prime Minister Manmohan Singh held the coal portfolio when the controversial block allocations were made, he should introspect on who should be held accountable.
"Whom was the Law Minister trying to protect when he interfered with the CBI status report?
Should not the Prime Minister take moral responsibility for the scam," Abhimanyu asked.
BJP demanded that the Supreme Court take full cognisance of the coal scam probe and appoint a Special Investigation Team (SIT) to investigate the case.
The party further demanded that the apex court monitor developments in the case on a day-to-day basis.
Abhimanyu also pressed for the cancellation of all controversial coal block allocations as was done in the case of 2G spectrum allocations.
"The loss of funds to the exchequer in the coal scam should also be recovered from the guilty," he said.
After facing flak from the Supreme Court, government has re-appointed senior IPS officer Ravi Kant in CBI to complete the probe in the high-profile coal blocks allocation case.
Ravi Kant, a 1998-batch IPS officer of Odisha cadre, will return to Intelligence Bureau after completion of his assignment.
Approval of the competent authority is conveyed for reappointment of Ravi Kant, IPS as DIG CBI for the purpose of enquiry and investigation into allocation of Coal Blocks.
"Ravi Kant, IPS will be reverted back to IB on completion of assigned duties in CBI," said an order issued on Tuesday by the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT), which acts as nodal department for administrative matters of the investigating agency.
The DoPT's directive has been sent to CBI Director for necessary action.
While hearing a case related to coal blocks allocation, the Supreme Court had on May 8 asked the Centre and the CBI to take immediate steps to repatriate Ravi Kant, who was the investigating officer in the multi-crore scam.
He was sent to Intelligence Bureau on promotion as Deputy Inspector General (DIG) from Superintendent of Police (SP).
The CBI had, however, said the officer had completed his tenure in the agency and left because of 'family reasons' even though he was given an extension.
CBI has so far registered 11 FIRs in the coal blocks allocation scam.
The Supreme Court had also rapped the CBI for sharing its draft status report with the then Law Minister Ashwani Kumar and two Joint Secretary level officers - Shatrughna Singh and A.K.
Bhalla in the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) and Coal Ministry respectively before submitting it.
"CBI has become a caged parrot.
We can't have CBI a caged parrot speaking in master's voice.
It is a sordid saga where there are many masters and one parrot," the court had observed during a hearing.
Following the developments, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh had on May 14 constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) to draft a law on ways to ensure greater autonomy for the CBI.
Finance Minister P Chidambaram led GoM will submit its findings in this regard to the apex court before July 10, next day of hearing of the case.
The BJP on Wednesday alleged that the UPA government not only indulged in rampant corruption but was also desperately trying to cover up its "misdeeds".
"The Congress-led UPA government is trying to subvert and undermine the authority of the three pillars of democracy--the executive, the legislature and judiciary," BJP's national spokesman Sudhanshu Trivedi, who was on a state visit, told reporters here.
Trivedi said that the confidence of people in the entire establishment of the state has been severely damaged during the UPA government rule and cannot be restored by mere resignation of two central ministers.
"It is unfortunate and painful that instead of introspection, senior leaders of the ruling party are making objectionable remarks about the apex court and are not sparing even the highest and one of the most respected institutions of the land," he said.
"How can a healthy democracy survive when the ruling party at the Centre was trying to subvert and undermine all democratic institutions, that too with the alleged involvement of Prime Minister's Office," Trivedi said.
The BJP leader said the UPA government has lost all the authority to be in power in the country.
Trivedi would hold a meeting with state party leaders and discuss strategy to be adopted for the coming elections in 2012 State party president G Kishan Reddy was also present at the press conference.
A day after its leader Gulab Chand Kataria was chargesheeted in Sohrabuddin encounter case, BJP today accused CBI of working at Congress' behest to implicate its members under a 'well-planned conspiracy' and dubbed as an eyewash the setting up of GoM to insulate the agency from political interference.
Rejecting all charges against Kataria, who is Leader of the Opposition in the Rajasthan Assembly, BJP President Rajnath Singh said the party stands behind him and will expose attempts of CBI and Congress both 'legally and politically.'
BJP has levelled these charges against CBI at a juncture when the agency is facing the heat from the Supreme Court for allowing vetting of the status report in the coal scam case by then Law Minister Ashwani Kumar.
Government had announced formation of a Group of Ministers yesterday to look into ways of making the agency independent.
BJP, however, termed the move as an 'eyewash.'
Singh, flanked by BJP Rajasthan unit chief Vasundhara Raje and Leader of the Opposition in Rajya Sabha Arun Jaitley, said these cases are part of a 'well-planned conspiracy.'
"The CBI chargesheet against Kataria is without any basis.
He is known for his propriety and credibility.
There is not a shred of truthful evidence against him.
The case is being pursued by CBI with the intention of implicating senior BJP leaders at the behest of the Congress," Jaitley said.
Jaitley, an eminent lawyer, maintained that CBI's supplementary chargesheet in the Sohrabuddin case against Kataria - who was Rajasthan Home Minister when the encounter took place - is the third such instance of the investigating agency trying to 'implicate' a BJP leader.
He cited the case of former Gujarat Minister of State for Home Amit Shah - also in the Sohrabuddin case - and Rajendra Rathore in another encounter case.
Jaitley showed CBI documents to insist that the agency had aimed at 'implicating' Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi through Shah in 2010.
Referring to the alleged bribery case against P K Bansal, Jaitley said the evidence against the former Railway Minister is '100 times more' yet the agency is going soft on him.
Former minister of state for coal Dasari Narayana Rao, a Tollywood film-maker and actor, was grilled by the CBI in connection with allotment of coal mines in the Coalgate scam.
CBI sources confirmed that the agency had recorded the statements of Rao and Santosh Bagrodia, his successor, regarding coal block allocations made when they were Union ministers of state in the coal ministry.
They were questioned separately regarding the coal block allocations from 2006 to 2009.
Rao was MoS coal from May 2004 to April 2008, and was succeeded by Bagrodia.
According to sources, former ministers of state for coal Dasari Narayana Rao and Santosh Bagrodia denied any involvement in the Coalgate scam.
When contacted, Raos public relations officer refused to comment ab-out his statement being recorded by the CBI.
The CBI has so far filed 11 FIRs in the case including one against the city-based Navabh-arat, regarding alleged irregularities in coal block allocations.
The CBI has booked cases against several companies including JLD Yavatmal Energy Ltd, Nagpur, JAS Infra-structure Capital Pvt.
Ltd (Kolkata), AMR Iron and Steel Ltd (Nagpur), Navabharat Power Pvt.
Ltd (Hyderabad) and Vini Iron and Steel Udyog Ltd (Kolkata).
Navabharat Power promoters Y.
Harish Chandra Prasad and company director P.
Trivikrama Prasad have been booked by the CBI.
The CBI has alleged that the company had shown bank loans as net worth to secure coal blocks.
Navbharat Power was accused of selling coal blocks of Odisha to the Essar group after it was allocated the coal blocks in January 2008.
The company has den-ied any irregularities.
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) Director Ranjit Sinha on Thursday accepted the Supreme Court's observations on the coal block allocation scam, saying that whatever the court has said is correct.
The Supreme Court had on Wednesday pulled up the CBI, the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) and Coal Ministry officials for changing the 'heart' of the coal scam probe report and directed the government to come out with a law before July 10 to insulate the agency from 'external influence and intrusion'.
Even as it came down heavily on these entities, the apex court also made a reference to Union Law Minister Ashwani Kumar's role in vetting the probe report and asked, "does it not subvert the integrity of the investigation if changes are brought in status report on the suggestion of Law Minister and government officers."
The coal scam concerns the government's allocation of the nation's coal deposits to public sector entities (PSEs) and private companies by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
In a draft report issued in March 2012, the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) office accused the government of allocating coal blocks in an inefficient manner during the period 2004-2009.
Over the Summer of 2012, the BJP lodged a complaint resulting in a Central Bureau of Investigation probe into whether the allocation of the coal blocks was in fact influenced by corruption.
The essence of the CAG's argument is that the government had the authority to allocate coal blocks by a process of competitive bidding, but chose not to.
As a result both public sector enterprises (PSEs) and private firms paid less than they might have otherwise.
In its draft report in March this year, the CAG estimated that the 'windfall gain' to the allocatees was Rs.10673.03 billion (approximately USD 200 billion).
The CAG Final Report tabled in Parliament put the figure at Rs.1855.91 billion (approximately USD 34 billion).
On August 27, 2012, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh read a statement in Parliament rebutting the CAG"s report both in its reading of the law and the alleged cost of the government"s policies.
Former senior police officers have also by and large welcomed the Supreme Court's strictures against the government and the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)in the coal block allocation scam report/affidavit.
The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) will seek response from CBI on the issue of missing files related to multi-crore coal blocks allocation scam being probed by the investigating agency.
The Commission will ask the CBI to give details on the issue of missing files related to the coal scam and also on whether or not it was hampering or going to hamper its investigation, official sources said.
They said the CVC may also seek details from Ministry of Coal on the matter.
The CVC, which exercises superintendence over CBI to oversee corruption cases probe, had in May last year asked the the agency to look into matter of coal blocks allocated to private companies between 2006 and 2009.
The CBI is looking into the allocation of coal mines post-1993 to ascertain any wrongdoing during the NDA regime.
The CBI has registered three preliminary inquiry and 13 FIRs so far in the case.
The move came up after Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal on August 17 had said that some files related to coal block allocations were missing.
Following Jaiswal's remarks, BJP has targeted the government and paralysed Parliament over the issue and demanded a statement by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
The Coal Ministry had then hurriedly formed a committee to look into the matter.
Bowing down to the demands of an agitated and dissatisfied opposition, the Coal Minister had on Friday made a detailed statement in Rajya Sabha over the issue and said that "it would be wrong to classify any file or document as missing at this stage when an inter-ministerial committee is actively engaged in locating these papers".
Amid controversy over missing files related to coal block allocation, some RTI replies given by the Coal Ministry to queries from NGO Greenpeace and other activists say that the documents are already with the CBI.
"The information sought on copies of applications of the companies who have been allocated coal blocks, it is informed that all the applications along with annexures or enclosures, in original, are in the custody of Central Bureau of Investigation," Ministry of Coal said in reply to a RTI query filed by Greenpeace.
Greenpeace said it had received two RTI replies from the Coal Ministry on October 4, 2012 and February 28.
"On both the occasions the Coal Ministry claimed that the files related to allocations of coal block from 1993-2012 are all with CBI," it said in a release issued today.
It also said it had received another RTI reply from Environment Ministry on December 23, 2011 stating that files relating of Mahan Coal Block are untraceable.
"This is with reference to your aforesaid application and to state that as per records available in the section, one file namely Mahan Opencast Coal mine Project of M/s Mahan Coal Com. is not traceable," the Environment Ministry had said in its reply to the query seeking "information pertaining to the missing files of Amelia and Mahan Coalmine Projects".
The Ministry had said both Mahan and Amelia Coal Mine Project files were kept in Vigyan Bhawan, R K Puram, New Delhi; "however, only the file on Mahan Coal Block is missing."
Greenpeace also alleged that Mahan coal block has also been named in the coalgate scam being probed by the CBI.
Responding to another RTI query on coal block allocation by advocate Vivek Garg, the Coal Ministry maintained the same reply.
"Most of the files or records relating to allocation of coal or lignite blocks are in custody of CBI, New Delhi," the ministry had said in the reply given in September last year.
Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal had on Saturday said that some files related to the coal blocks allocation scam were missing.
As his remark stalled the Parliament proceedings, Jaiswal made a statement yesterday in the House saying no stone would be left unturned in tracing the documents to be provided to the CBI.
Main opposition BJP on Monday once again targeted Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in Rajya Sabha on missing files pertaining to coal mines allocation saying the scam is 'monumental' and demanded that he clarify on it.
Raising the issue during Zero Hour, Prakash Javadekar (BJP) said two days back the Prime Minister said he was not the custodian of files whereas the Opposition believed 'he is not only the custodian of files but also the custodian of the nation but not performing both the tasks well'.
"It is a monumental scam and occurred when the Prime Minister was the Coal Minister...PM should give a statement on this," Javadekar said, demanding to know whether any FIR was lodged in the missing files issue despite the Surpeme Court asking for it.
Amid attack over missing files pertaining to allocation of coal mines, Prime Minister had on August 30 said in Rajya Sabha, "I am not the custodian of files in the Coal Ministry."
Dissatisfied with the reply, Javadekar launched a scathing attack on the government saying it 'is doing a massive cover up' and sought PM's statement on it.
He said unfortunately the Committee, formed by Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal included a Joint Secretary level officer who is charged with changing the files with the CBI.
This is like handing over the keys of the treasury to the accused, Javadekar said adding, "CBI as well as the Coal Ministry has said before PAC (Public Accounts Committee) that all important files are missing...We demand don't keep such people who were instrumental in changing the files."
As he said that the scam has 'smeared the face of the government' and continued to target PM, members from treasury benches countered him while BJP members shouted 'shame-shame'.
Ravi Shankar Prasad (BJP) joined Javadekar saying, "There was a discussion on it but PM's clarifications are pending.
This is a monumental scam."
The Centre on Thursday faced ire of the Supreme Court on missing files on Coalgate and for not sharing information with CBI and was directed to hand over relevant documents within two weeks to the agency which would also probe disappearance of certain vital papers.
Holding that the missing documents are 'vital' for the probe in the scam, the apex court directed the Coal Ministry to lodge complaint with the CBI if it fails to trace any documents, sought by the agency.
"You (Centre) cannot do like this.
Your explanation that files are being searched is not reasonable.
This will not help," a three-judge bench headed by Justice R.M.
Lodha said.
The bench slammed the government for not lodging FIRs on missing files and raised a question as to whether 'it is an attempt to destroy the records in the case'.
"Four months have passed.
Have you filed an FIR for missing files.
Is it an attempt to destroy the records.
Truth must come out," the bench, also comprising justices Madan B.
Lokur and Kurian Joseph, said while noting that missing documents pertain to financial aspects of the allocations.
"This cannot be left as it is.
Why a case has not been registered so far?
Proper report has to be lodged to find out whether it has been stolen or destroyed.
This cannot be allowed.
Some investigation has to be done on the issue," the bench said.
"For any reason if files are not available or lost or stolen or destroyed, tell us when will you lodge a complaint with CBI," the bench asked Attorney General G E Vahanvati, who, appearing for the Coal Ministry, assured that the Ministry would do the needful if documents are not traced.
The bench then asked the CBI to give a list of documents, files, information, sought by it, within five days to the Coal Ministry which, in turn, would furnish them within two weeks thereafter.
If any documents remain untraceable, then FIRs have to be lodged by the Coal Ministry with the CBI within a week thereafter, it said.
The Centre had earlier admitted before the apex court that 189 out of 236 documents sought by CBI, which is probing coal block allocations scam, were 'not-available'.
Giving details of missing documents, the Coal Ministry had said 7 files, 173 applications of coal block allotees/ applicants and nine other documents were being searched by it.
In a hearing that spanned over two hours, the bench said there cannot be any "justification for the missing files" and that CBI probe be done despite an inter-ministerial committee formed by the Centre to look into the issue.
The bench also referred to the disappearance of a PMO's reference letter to the Coal Ministry relating to Congress MP Vijay Darda's alleged recommendations for coal block allocations to some firms.
"It is an external committee.
We are not concerned about it.
Before the CBI probe into the case, we grant time to the Centre to find out files.
If files are not available, then you lodge a complaint with CBI," the bench said.
The bench then took the government to task for "sitting over" the documents sought by CBI in the case.
"You cannot sit over the documents.
All documents which are necessary have to be made available.
Many documents, minutes of the meeting, draft minutes of meetings of the screening committee are yet to be provided to CBI.
We are making it very clear that it cannot go on like this," the bench said.
Referring to certain portions of the status report, "the crucial reports of financial experts of Coal India Ltd (CIL) on financial positions of applicant companies are missing from Ministry of Coal."
The AG then replied that the government would cooperate with the agency, drawing sharp reaction from the bench which said "who stopped you from doing so for the last four months"?
"Documents might be voluminous but it is not that it would take so long to respond to CBI's query.
Record of government office should not go anywhere.
One original file is a guard file which does not go anywhere.
One has to work overtime but it must be done," it said.
The CBI today filed a status report on the coal allocation scam telling the Supreme Court that the investigating agency need not seek sanction for prosecuting government officials if the case is being monitored by the Supreme Court.
In a six-page affidavit, the CBI referred to the apex court's judgement in 2G scam in which a time period for government was stipulated in granting sanction in other cases.
"There is no requirement of sanction for prosecution in cases where court has either directed investigation or is monitoring investigation of the case.
The consistent pronouncements of this court on Section 6A of the DSPE (Delhi Special Police Establishment) Act and Section 19 of the PC (Prevention of Corruption) Act clearly show that requirement of sanction for prosecution is not mandatory when the same is done pursuant to court direction or where cases are monitored by the Court," the agency said.
Secretary post sought for CBI Director
The Centre, however, had earlier taken a contrary stand before the apex court by saying that even in a court-monitored probe, prior sanction is required to investigate government officials in a corruption case.
Countering the stand of the Centre, the CBI in its affidavit submitted that making prior sanction mandatory would amount to suspension of court's power to monitor investigation.
"It is submitted that in case if it is held that even in the investigation which are monitored by court, requirement of sanction under Section 6A is mandatory, then it would amount to suspension of the power of the court to monitor investigation," the affidavit said.
Buttressing its stand on the issue of sanction, the agency referred to a Constitution bench judgement holding that "Constitutional court are empowered to direct investigation by the CBI and in such cases no sanction is necessary".
The CBI said one of the objectives behind the concept of prior sanction was to protect bureaucrats from the "threat" and "ignominy" of "malicious and vexatious enquiries" which is not a possibility in a court-monitored probe.
"In court-monitored cases, the courts act as a guardian/custodian of the rights of the citizens... and in the cases where investigation is monitored by the courts, the objective of protection under Section 6A of the Act is already achieved, and therefore no prior sanction or approval of government is necessary in such cases," the agency said.
The CBI also submitted "any other interpretation of the Section 6 A would render the same as ultra-vires as being violative of Article 21 and would defeat the purpose for which the said Section was incorporated."
The agency, in another application, has sought a direction from the apex court that it be permitted to disclose and discuss the facts of the Coalgate cases with its in-house and special lawyers.
It said the names of the prosecutors and special lawyers would be submitted to the court on August 29 in a sealed envelope.
The bench, on May 8, asked CBI to ensure secrecy and had said that probe details be not shared with "any person or authority, including any minister...law officers, advocates of CBI..."
Seeking a modification in the order, CBI said for filing the charge sheets in the cases, "an examination regarding admissibility of and sufficiency of evidence collected during the course of investigation is required to be carried out.
For finalising the proper final reports, facts of the cases are required to be discussed and vetted through the advocates and prosecutors."
The CBI also sought more financial power and said this should be kept out of government control.
CBI sleuths probing the coal scam suspect that the final minutes of the crucial 26th screening committee meet, held on May 1, 2005, may have been lost permanently.
The coal ministry on August 7 informed the CBI that the final minutes are not traceable.
The 26th screening committee meeting that forms the basis of the coal block allocations are one of the 29 files that the CBI is waiting to receive.
Under attack for several files pertaining to coal block allocations going missing, coal minister Sriprakash Jaiswal on Thursday said he has asked officials to locate the missing papers by Tuesday and hinted that CBI may be asked to look into the case after that.
The coal ministry has asked also other ministries to constitute search teams to facilitate probe into the issue. I had a meeting with officials of different ministries...The next meeting is scheduled for September 10 to take stock of files traced and those still missing, Jaiswal said.
CBI on Monday received a fresh tranche of files and documents from the Coal Ministry and began examining them as part of its probe in coal block allocation scam.
CBI sources said the fresh set of documents came late in the evening and the scrutiny has started.
They said only after analysing the documents, they would be able to ascertain the number of files which have still not been provided.
Nearly 150 files and documents were to be received by CBI from the Coal Ministry.
Earlier in the day, a Coal Ministry official said a report, along with the documents and files, was despatched to CBI.
Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal did not make any comment on whether the files have been dispatched but said "the instructions of the Supreme Court are being followed."
Asked about details of the report the ministry has sent to CBI, the official declined to disclose the contents citing confidentiality.
While hearing the case on August 29, the Supreme Court had directed CBI to give a list of documents, files and information sought by it within five days to the Coal Ministry which, in turn, was to furnish them within two weeks.
Asked when the ministry will file a complaint with regard to the missing files, the official said "we will take action in accordance with the directions of the Supreme Court and as per the law and within the timeline which has been prescribed for us."
The agency in its letter dated September 2 to Attorney General G E Vahanvati had given an exhaustive list of over 50 allocations, the files of which have not been received by it.
The apex court had directed the Coal Ministry that if any document remains untraceable, then FIRs have to be lodged by the Coal Ministry with CBI within a week thereafter.
Holding that the missing documents are "vital" for the probe into the scam, the apex court had directed the Coal Ministry to lodge complaint with CBI if it fails to trace any document sought by the agency.
"You (Centre) cannot do like this.
Your explanation that files are being searched is not reasonable.
This will not help," a three-judge bench headed by Justice R M Lodha had said.
"Four months have passed.
Have you filed an FIR for missing files?
Is it an attempt to destroy the records?
Truth must come out," the bench, also comprising justices Madan B Lokur and Kurian Joseph, had said while taking note that the missing documents pertain to financial aspects of the coal blocks allocations.
CBI is looking for some crucial records related to ongoing 13 cases filed by it in connection with the coal blocks allocation scam which include the letter of Congress MP Vijay Darda recommending coal block for AMR Iron and Steel, one of the accused companies.
In the list given to the Coal Ministry, CBI has also given a list of files which include allotments made to Tata Sponge Iron private Limited, minutes of 26th screening committee, allotment to Jharkhand Ispat private limited, agenda form sent by the company to Under Secretary S K Kakkar.
The files relating to Pushp Steel, Bhushan Power and Steel, SPS Sponge Iron Limited, scrutiny report regarding financial strength of companies prepared by Coal India which was mentioned in the 35th screening committee meeting, confirmation regarding prohibition with regard to transfer of equity of shares by companies pursuant to allocation of coal blocks.
Three months after registering an FIR against him, CBI on Thursday questioned Congress MP and industrialist Naveen Jindal in connection with a case of alleged cheating and criminal conspiracy in bagging Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Jharkhand in 2008.
Highly-placed sources in the agency said Jindal was summoned by CBI after which he expressed the desire to appear before it today.
He met the investigation team in the afternoon and his examination continued till late in the evening, the sources said.
The agency conceded to his request that he should not be subjected to media glare after which the venue was changed from the CBI headquarters to a safe house where his examination took place, they said.
The agency has booked him in its 12th FIR in connection with coal blocks allocation scam registered in June this year.
Former Minister of State for Coal Dasari Narayan Rao has also been booked by the agency in the case.
Neither the company JSPL nor Jindal gave their comments on the issue as messages and emails sent to them remained unanswered.
During its probe into the scam, it was for the first time the then Minister of State was named as an accused in an FIR by CBI in which it was alleged that he had received Rs 2.25 crore camouflaged as investment from one of Jindal's firms within a year of allocation of a coal block to him.
CBI sources said Jindal Steel and Power Limited and Gagan Sponge Iron Limited, also a Jindal firm, had bagged Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Birbhum, Jharkhand in 2008 by alleged misrepresentation of facts when Rao was the Minister of State for Coal.
CBI has claimed in its FIR that the misrepresentation was allegedly done on three counts--land, water supply and previous allocations.
CBI on Wednesday received a fresh letter from the Coal Ministry giving details of files related to coal block allocations which remain untraceable in the ministry, paving the way for filing of FIR by the agency.
CBI sources said the agency will soon take a call on proceeding with filing of case with regards to untraceable files as it received today list of files which are untraceable in the Ministry.
Coal Ministry had sent a tranche of documents along with the list of files and records which have been traced.
The preliminary analysis had revealed that not all files sought by the agency were provided by the Ministry.
In the communication through Attorney General, CBI had listed out several records which the ministry had claimed that it has provided to the agency but were not handed over.
CBI is looking for crucial records related to ongoing 13 cases filed by it in connection with the coal blocks allocation scam which include the letter of Congress MP Vijay Darda recommending coal block for AMR Iron and Steel, one of the accused companies.
In the list given to the Coal Ministry, CBI has also given a list of files which include allotments made to Tata Sponge Iron private Limited, minutes of 26th screening committee, allotment to Jharkhand Ispat Private Limited, agenda form sent by the company to Under Secretary S K Kakkar.
The apex court had directed the Coal Ministry that if any document remains untraceable, then FIRs have to be lodged by the Coal Ministry with CBI within a week thereafter.
Two union ministers joined industry in expressing concerns over CBI naming reputed industrialist Kumar Mangalam Birla in coal scam case as both felt that it could hurt investor and business confidence.
Corporate Affairs Minister Sachin Pilot said such a development will dampen investment sentiment while Commerce and Industry Minister Anand Sharma termed it as unfortunate.
"While no one is above the law and wrong doers have to be brought to justice, we must ensure that such actions are based on hard facts and do not create an atmosphere of fear and uncertainty," Pilot told reporters.
"Recent incidents will certainly dampen business confidence and investment sentiment, both domestic and foreign; and perhaps also negatively affect decision making by bureaucrats and policy makers," he said.
Describing the development as "unfortunate", Anand Sharma said it could raise questions over investor confidence in the country.
In a veiled criticism of CBI, Sharma said the authorities should not "play to the gallery and create an environment of sensation and shock".
"So, the larger question which comes up is that whether we have an environment which is conducive to decision making and also which gives confidence to the investors and to the corporate world," Sharma said.
A number of industry leaders have also expressed their concerns over the CBI action against Kumar Mangalam Birla, who heads USD 40-billion business conglomerate, Aditya Birla group which is present across sectors like metals, mining, cement, retail, telecom, technology and finance.
Those who have voiced their concerns include Deepak Parekh, Ajay Piramal, Nimesh Kampani and T V Mohandas Pai, as also some industry chambers.
Describing the development as unfortunate, former Infosys board member Mohandas Pai said, "It seems investigating agencies have run amok.
Unless one has strong evidence, targeting business leaders will have a bad impact on the economy."
"Kumar Mangalam Birla is a very reputed industrialist and comes from an iconic family.
Theindustry stands by him.
This is not a very good thing for the confidence of the industry," President of PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry Suman Jyoti Khaitan said.
Questioning the timing of the filing of the FIR, he said:
"The allegation against him is about something which happened eight years ago...We wonder what the investigating agency was doing ever since and why they have woken up now."
Assocham Secretary General D S Rawat said the development would certainly raise a question in the minds of the industry people.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has booked Birla as a representative of Aditya Birla Group and his group company, aluminium maker Hindalco, for alleged corruption in the allocation of Talabira two coal blocks in Odisha which was allotted to it on November 10, 2005.
With Prime Minister Manmohan Singh under fresh attack in coal block allocations, the government sought to take refuge in the fact that the matter is sub-judice and hit out at BJP for being 'irresponsible'.
Information and Broadcasting Minister Manish Tewari said the government has already provided all documents to the CBI and if anybody has to say anything, it should be at an appropriate forum and at an appropriate time.
"Our attention has been drawn to some reports which have appeared in the sections of press.
Most respectfully, I would like to submit that the entire matter is under investigation and the investigation that is being monitored by the Supreme Court of India directly," he told reporters here.
"So, therefore, in a subjudice matter where investigations are in progress it is inappropriate for people to be commenting in a manner in which they've done," he said.
He was responding when asked to react to comments made by former Coal Secretary P C Parakh, who has been booked by CBI in the coal scam, that the Prime Minister was the final decision maker and must be counted as a 'conspirator'.
This prompted BJP to demand Singh's resignation.
The government has provided all documents to the investigators and, therefore, this 'unnecessary speculation' is something which needs to be avoided, Tewari added.
The Prime Minister's Office refused to comment and merely referred to the September 3 statement by Singh in Parliament where he had said the government has nothing to hide and that there should be no "hasty" conclusion that something is 'fishy'.
Asked if the latest FIR in connection with allocation of two coal blocks in Odisha would give fresh ammunition to BJP, Tewari said, "Well do you think that the Bhartiya Janata Party requires ammunition.
"They are a self-propelled and self-firing automatic weapon which is unfortunately full of blanks," the Minister said.
Attacking the opposition party, Tewari said, "To expect anything else from BJP except irresponsibility would be expecting the Sun to rise from the west rather than the east.
"So, therefore, I don't think it is important as to what BJP has to say, because they have been saying this for the last ten years.
But responsibility and propriety demand that in an investigation which is being monitored by the apex court, people need to be restrained in their utterances," he said.
The Minister said that if some people did have anything to say, they will have their say at the appropriate forum, at the appropriate time.
Amid strong reactions over CBI's FIR against top industrialist Kumar Mangalam Birla in the coal scam, Congress General Secretary Digvijaya Singh urged caution in proceeding in the case saying that while "we are witch hunting", the country is forced to import coal to feed its thermal power stations.
"The government, the judiciary and everyone should note that despite one of the largest coal reserves, we are witch hunting and importing coal to feed our thermal power plants," Singh said.
As to former coal secretary PC Parekh's statement that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh should also be made an accused in the coal scam case, Singh remarked:
"He is a free man.
He is free to make any statement; but instead of making statements, he should say whatever he says in front of CBI."
The comments by Singh followed close on the heels of Corporate Affairs Minister Sachin Pilot's remark that it must be ensured that such actions are based on 'hard facts' as they dampen business confidence and investor sentiment.
Such actions should not end up creating an atmosphere of fear and uncertainty, Pilot added.
A number of industry leaders have expressed concern over the CBI action against Birla, who heads the USD 40-billion Aditya Birla Group, which has interests spread across metals, mining, cement, retail, telecom, technology and financial sectors, among others.
Among those voicing their concerns on the issue were Deepak Parekh, Ajay Piramal, Nimesh Kampani and TV Mohandas Pai, as also some industry chambers.
Earlier in the day, Commerce and Industry Minister Anand Sharma also termed the development unfortunate and said it could raise questions over investor confidence in the country.
Former Coal Secretary P.C.
Parekh's remarks against Prime Minister Manmohan Singh on the coal scam gave fresh ammunition to BJP which demanded he should step down immediately as he is equally culpable in the scam since all decisions were taken with his consent.
The opposition also made public its ire over the FIR against Parekh, widely seen as the whistleblower of the coal blocks allocation scam, and said the official is being targeted by CBI even though he is the one who had moved a Cabinet note suggesting the allocations be made through the auction route.
"Today a surprising development has taken place where in a bizarre instance an FIR has been lodged against the officer who suggested that the auction route should be adopted in coal block allocations and even prepared a Cabinet note on it," BJP spokesperson Prakash Javadekar said.
The BJP MP claimed that instead of accepting the proposal, given by Parekh in 2004, the Manmohan Singh government had deliberately kept the Cabinet note in cold storage so as to enable it to allot coal blocks arbitrarily.
BJP alleged Congress was working with the intention of committing a scam and hence did not accept the suggestion for competitive bidding.
Parekh, who was known as the whistleblower of the coal scam, has been named in the scam.
He retorted by saying all decisions on the allocations were taken with the PM's consent.
The main opposition further charged the Coal portfolio was with Manmohan Singh as people usually do not ask questions about a ministry being handled by the Prime Minister himself.
"Right from day one, BJP has been demanding the Prime Minister's resignation as he was the then Coal Minister under whose signature and seal the monumental scam happened....
BJP reiterates its demand for his immediate resignation because the buck stops with him," Javadekar said.
BJP and Left parties demanded a fair and transparent probe into the issue.
"I am not surprised that Parekh has said that the PM should be accused No.
1 in the coal scam.
We are all aware of the fact that he was the Coal Minister during the period of the coal scam and every allotment of coal block has been done with his signature," BJP leader Yashwant Sinha said.
He said Parakh should reveal all details about how coal files were disposed off.
"He has spoken a little, he should come out clean now, make public statements of how files were disposed off at that time, how chits were received from Congress party headquarters and the PMO and how the PMO transmitted those instructions to the Coal Ministry for allotment of coal blocks either to the favourites or to persons with whom they had struck deals," he said.
BJP Deputy Leader in Rajya Sabha Ravi Shankar Prasad said Parakh's statement "merits serious consideration" as the accountability of the PMO and the PM is equally important.
"Parekh, who was termed a whistle blower by CAG report, was demanding a fair process for whole allocation through auctioning which was delayed by the government.
Until the new rules came into being, these all coal blocks were allocated in a hurry to ineligible persons.
"Therefore, the accountability of the PMO and the PM is equally important.
We demand a fair investigation," he said.
BJP asked why the then Minister of State for Coal, Dasari Narayan Rao, who did not take cognisance of Parekh's note and allegedly favoured some companies, was not questioned by CBI.
BJP alleged CBI has not even gone near the real people behind the coal scam.
"The Supreme Court had called CBI a caged parrot.
In Railgate, it had made the one who committed the scam a witness," Javadekar said.
"The Prime Minister has no defence.
His role and his silence allowed corruption to take place," he said.
"In the bizarre allotment, neither the state exchequer got any benefit nor did the ultimate consumer receive any benefit by way of cheap power.
The only beneficiary seems to be the ruling party.
This is a monumental corruption which the Congress-led government is desperately trying to cover up," Javadekar said.
The BJP on Wednesday wondered why Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and the then coal minister Dasari Narayana Rao have not been named in the FIR filed by the CBI in the coal scam.
Addressing the media in New Delhi, party spokesperson Prakash Javadekar said by targeting the former coal secretary P.C.
Parekh, the government is sending out a message to all top bureaucrats to keep quiet.
He said the Prime Minister owed an answer to the monumental scam instead of shooting the messenger.
It was P.C.
Parekh, the then coal secretary, who kept the system of coal allocation clean and went by the rule book.
Today, the ministers who took the decision by bending rules are let go scot free and bureaucrats are being targeted for doing their duty, Javadekar said.
The spokesperson said it was 'ridiculous' that Parekh, a whistleblower and one who suggested correction in the system and introduction of competitive bidding, is being accused while the Prime Minister, who was the final authority, is not being held responsible.
Facing CBI charges of conspiracy and corruption in coal blocks allocation, Parekh on Wednesday asserted that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh was the final decision maker and must be counted in as a "conspirator", prompting BJP to demand a through probe.
Asked if CBI omitted Prime Minister's name purposely, the former bureaucrat said, "This question should be asked to CBI on why his name is omitted."
After registering the fresh FIR with a CBI court here, agency teams carried out coordinated searches at nearly six locations in Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad and Bhubaneshwar which included offices of Hindalco and residence of Parekh.
Industrialist Kumar Mangalam Birla, Parekh and others have been booked by CBI in connection with alleged irregularities in the allocation of two coal blocks in Odisha eight years back.
Dubbing the allegation against him as baseless, Parekh said he saw nothing wrong in the government decision.
"There is absolutely nothing wrong with the decision.
It was a very fair and correct decision that we took.
I don't know why CBI thought that there is a conspiracy," Parekh said.
"But, if there is a conspiracy, then there are different members in this conspiracy.
There is K M Birla who made the representation, he is one conspirator.
I, who examined the case and made a recommendation, I can be another conspirator and the Prime Minister, who as the Coal Minister, took the final decision, is the third conspirator.
So, if the CBI thinks there is a conspiracy, why did they choose and select Birla and me and not the PM.
If conspiracy is there, then everyone is part of the conspiracy," he told television channels, adding that after Shibu Soren resigned as Coal Minister, the Prime Minister had then directly taken charge of the ministry.
BJP came out all guns blazing following Parekh's remarks, saying "Accountability of the Prime Minister and the PMO is equally important.
Therefore, we demand a fair investigation."
Parekh's statement "merits serious consideration," BJP deputy leader in Rajya Sabha Ravi Shankar Prasad said.
Describing Parekh as an upright IAS officer, BJP leader Yashwant Sinha said, "The time has come for Parekh to speak up.
He has spoken a little, he should come out clean now, make public statements of how files were disposed off at that time (when the PM was in charge of the Coal Ministry)... how chits were received from Congress party headquarters in the PMO and PMO transmitted those instructions to the coal ministry for allotment of coal blocks."
Congress said the matter is under investigation and is being monitored by the Supreme Court.
"Unnecessary speculation," should be avoided, Union Minister Manish Tewari said, adding that Government has been "fully cooperating" on the issue.
Congress general secretary Digvijaya Singh said while Parekh was a free man, whatever he has to say on the matter should be before the CBI.
I am as responsible as PM:
Parekh
In reply to a poser, Parekh said he never faced any pressure from the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) over the issue of allocation of coal blocks Talabira II and Talabira III coal blocks in Odisha.
"Lobbying by MPs, yes, but there was no pressure from the PMO," he said.
Claiming that the CBI has failed to distinguish between "a fair and correct decision and a wrong decision", he said the agency has not appreciated the issues involved in the case.
"If CBI behaves like this, then people will find it difficult to take decisions, especially young officers.
It should have a relook at the entire case and scrap it," he said.
He said that as Coal Secretary he had tried to make the coal block allocation process more transparent by recommending open auction and e-auction by amending the relevant Act.
He claimed then Coal Minister Shibu Soren was opposed to the idea.
But when he resigned from the government, the Prime Minister approved the idea and asked him to prepare a note for the Union Cabinet.
Birla, Parekh and other accused will be called in for questioning, CBI sources said.
Birla has been named since the decision to accomodate Hindalco in the coal block, meant for PSUs only, was taken after he had a meeting with Parekh in the latter half of 2005.
The USD 40 billion (Rs.2.45 lakh crore) conglomerate has denied receiving any FIR and said the allegations against Birla were "preposterous".
Parekh said there were two applicants for the two coal blocks, the first was Hindalco and the second was Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC).
Since NLC was a state-owned company, the Screening Committee under the Coal Ministry decided to make the allocation to it.
"At that point of time, Birla made a presentation to the Prime Minister, saying since his company was the first applicant for the coal block and was equally eligible and competent for allocation....therefore the decision should be reconsidered," Parekh said.
He said Birla had also met him with a similar representation.
"Thereafter, I made a proposal that along with NLC, we must also include Hindalco in this block.
So, both of them were advised to form a joint venture company."
Parekh said:
"If ultimately the case goes to the court and the court finds that there is something wrong, I can't say I am not responsible.
I am as much responsible as the PM if there is something wrong."
Industrialist Kumar Mangalam Birla and former Coal Secretary P.C.
Parekh have been booked by CBI on charges of criminal conspiracy and corruption in connection with alleged irregularities in the allocation of two coal blocks eight years back.
After registering the fresh FIR with a CBI court here, agency teams on Tuesday carried out coordinated searches at nearly six locations in Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad and Bhubaneshwar which included offices of Hindalco and residence of Parekh in Secunderabad, Hyderabad.
CBI named 46-year-old Birla, chairman of Aditya Birla Group, along with Parekh and unknown persons and officials of Hindalco and Coal Ministry in the FIR, the 14th in the multi-crore scandal, for alleged criminal conspiracy and under provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
Birla and Parekh will be called in for questioning, CBI sources said.
Birla has been named since the decision to accomodate Hindalco in the coal block, meant for PSUs only, was taken after he had a meeting with Parekh in the latter half of 2005.
The USD 40 billion (Rs.2.45 lakh crore) conglomerate has denied receiving any FIR and refuted allegations of any wrongdoing.
Hindalco informed Bombay Stock Exchange that "We wish to state unambiguously that we have followed every process required for allocation of coal completely, as stipulated by the Government policy."
"This relates to media reports on an FIR naming Hindalco and our Chairman on coal issues.
Apparently, this seems to be part of a larger case entailing coal allocation to companies, and being one of the companies, we are being investigated also."
CBI gave a statement saying that the agency had registered a case against the then Coal Ministry official; representative of Mumbai-based Group of Companies, Odisha- based Industry and unknown other persons and officials in connection with allocation of Talabira II and Talabira III coal blocks in Odisha.
Shares of Aditya Birla-promoted firms such as Hindalco Industries and AB Nuvo on Tuesday ended the day on a mixed note, Hindalco Industries' scrip that had tanked 4.97 per cent to Rs 105.10 in intra-day trade, recouped the losses and finally ended the day with a gain of 1.45 per cent at Rs 112.20 on the BSE.
"It is alleged in the FIR that during the year 2005, the persons entered into a criminal conspiracy with one another and then public servants by abusing their positions as such showed undue favour to Odisha-based Industry in allocation of Talabira II and Talabira III coal blocks along with a Public Sector Undertaking of Tamil Nadu," CBI spokesperson Kanchan Prasad said in a statement here.
According to the FIR, Tamil Nadu government PSU Neyveli Lignite Limited was to be given Talabira II block but Parekh allegedly favoured Hindalco and allowed it to share the block with Neyveli leading to notional loss to the exchequer.
The agency could not reach exact quantum of loss as the coal block is still not operational.
The sources said the CBI was still looking for exact quid pro quo between Birla and Parekh but added that alleged 'undue' favours shown resulted in loss to the exchequer.
Birla's name has been mentioned as a representative of Aditya Birla Group in the FIR.
Hindalco is one of the group companies of the conglomerate.
The blocks were allocated for power production during a meeting of the Screening Committee of the Coal Ministry, they said and claimed that the coal allocation was meant for PSUs only.
Parekh, who was Coal Secretary at the time of this allocation, faces charges of criminal misconduct under the Prevention of Corruption Act as also criminal conspiracy.
This is the first FIR from the preliminary enquiry into allocation of coal blocks and awarding of contracts for formation of joint ventures by government companies under the Government Dispensation Category from 1993 onwards, the sources said.
The previous 13 FIRs registered by the agency were from the enquiry which looked into allocations made during the period 2006-09.
CBI has been at the receiving end in the Supreme Court which has posed tough questions on the slow pace of its probe.
Another Hyderabad angle to the coal block allocation scam surfaced on Tuesday with Central Bureau of Investigation teams from New Delhi, assisted by the Hyderabad unit, searching the residence of former coal secretary P.C.
Parekh at Secunderabad after registering a case under criminal conspiracy and the Prevention of Corruption Act against him and industrialist Kumar Mangalam Birla.
This is the 14th FIR related to the coal scam with four of them being linked to Hyderabad, including the case booked against the Navbharat group, industrialist Y.
Harischandra Prasad, Trivikrama Prasad, former coal minister Dasari Narayan Rao and his company Soubhagya Media, industrialist Commanduri Parthasarathy, Athena and Kamal Sponge.
According to the CBI, the recent case has been booked in connection with allocation of Talabira 2 and Talabira 3 coal blocks in Odisha to Hindalco, the Birla groups aluminum manufacturing company.
In the FIR, the CBI has alleged conspiracy between Parekh an AP cadre IAS official and Birla and others in 2005.
Asserting that the Coalgate probe is moving with a slow pace, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) on Tuesday targetted Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh who held direct charge of the coal ministry during part of the period under scrutiny.
Reacting to reports of the CBI registering a fresh case against Aditya Birla Group chief Kumar Mangalam Birla, BJP spokesperson Prakash Javadekar said the investigating agency is unable to find the files which have been deliberately misplaced.
Fresh case filed against Kumar Mangalam Birla.
They are unable to trace that how the PM as Coal Minister and his Ministry acted while granting and allocated the coal blocks.
So, a complete monumental fraud is being investigated at a slow pace that too because Supreme Court is monitoring (it), Javadekar said.
Otherwise, if Supreme Court had not been monitoring (then) there would have been no probe at all.
And therefore, we hope that Supreme Court will take cognizance of the speed also and will take it to its logical conclusion, he added.
The CBI, which is reportedly conducting raids on the premises of the company in various cities including Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata, has registered the 14th FIR in the high profile coal block allocation scam and has named Kumar Mangalam Birla in the chargesheet that specifically mentions cheating and forgery.
The BJP has held the Prime Minister responsible and demanded his resignation for an estimated loss of Rs 1.86 lakh crores to the national exchequer by the CAG in connection with the coal block allocation.
The CAG report does not indict the Prime Minister or his office, but the BJP is emphasizing that the Prime Minister held direct charge of the coal ministry for the years under scrutiny.
Income Tax department on Thursday seized Rs 25 crore that was recovered by CBI here during searches at the office of Hindalco Industries, which has been booked by the agency for alleged corruption in coal block allocations.
"The cash has been seized under Income Tax laws and further proceedings to check the source of the money are on," an official said.
A Hindalco spokesperson, however, said the company is checking the details.
I-T will now ask the company to produce documents and validate the source of the recovered cash, sources said.
The CBI, during its searches conducted on Wednesday, at the fourth floor office of the UCO Bank building of the firm here at Parliament Street, had found unaccounted Rs 25 crore in cash and incriminating documents.
The agency had then sounded the I-T department.
Soon after registering FIR against former Coal Secretary P. C.
Parakh, Aditya Birla Group Chairman Kumar Mangalam Birla and Hindalco Industries for alleged irregularities in the allocation of Talabira II and III coal block eight years ago, searches were conducted by CBI at six locations.
The searches were carried out in Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad and Bhubaneshwar.
CBI has registered the 14th FIR in the coal scam in the alleged "undue favours" shown to Birla by the then Coal Secretary.
Sources said the probe is monitored by Supreme Court and CBI will inform the apex court of all developments that have taken place in its status report to be filed on October 25.
They said they have strong evidence to buttress their claims in connection with the case and the allegations would be probed further during their probe in the case.
CBI sources said they have slapped charges of criminal misconduct on the part of the government official and that stands even if there is no quid pro quo.
The sources claimed that alleged favours shown to Birla in awarding Talabira II and III resulted in notional loss to the exchequer which are enough to book Parakh and Birla for criminal conspiracy.
Parakh and Hindalco have both refuted the allegations and claimed no wrong doing was involved in the decision.
Former top bureaucrats have come out in support of ex-Coal Secretary P.C.
Parakh, who has been named by CBI in the coal blocks allocation scam, warning that harassment of honest officers will erode Government's credibility and stop senior officers from taking decisions.
"Parakh, as I have known him, is an honest, competent officer.
While I do not wish to comment on the CBI investigation as such, as I do not have all the facts, I am at a loss to understand how an FIR has been filed only against him and no one in the PMO and no Minister," said E.A.S Sarma, former Coal Secretary.
"If it is a case of conspiracy, all the conspirators should be taken into account.
I hope there is no conspiracy!," said Sarma, a former IAS officer.
"I feel that investigation in such cases should be objective and uninfluenced by extraneous pressures.
A clear distinction must be made between decisions taken in good faith and malafide decisions.
It is unfortunate that dishonest Ministers, politicians and officers should be let off and honest officers harassed.
It will only erode the credibility of the government which has already been on the decline in the recent times," he said.
Sarma said he has written to CVC on June 15 last year requesting it to initiate an investigation into the role of the PMO in the coalgate affair and three other scams.
"I reminded CVC at least two times after that.
There has been no visible response from CVC on my letters," Sarma said.
Former Cabinet Secretary T.S.R.
Subramanian said such kind of action by CBI against Parakh will stop others from taking decisions.
"There are all kind of bureaucrats, good, bad, honest...
There has to be a reasonable basis for any action by the agency," he said.
"According to the FIR, it was said Parakh met Kumar Mangalam Birla.
As Cabinet Secretary, I used to meet ten bureaucrats, ten politicians and ten businessmen daily.
Should that mean that I be also made an accused?" he asked.
Parakh wanted the system to be changed for good, rued Subramanian.
The former Cabinet Secretary also felt that there was an 'ulterior motive' behind the move to name Parakh as an accused.
"If he has been made an accused, he could be crippled as a witness.
There could be an ulterior motive," he said.
Former Central Vigilance Commissioner N.
Vittal accused CBI of not following its charter.
"It is utterly unfair and incompetent on part of CBI (to name Parakh).
They are not following their charter.
I condemn CBI's action," he said.
"I have known Parakh.
He is an honest person and has a good reputation," Vittal said.
The former CVC said going by CBI's logic as a minister in charge of coal ministry, Prime Minister should be held responsible for taking any decision on the matter.
Former IAS officer G.
Sundaram also condemned CBI's action.
"I do not know him (Parakh).
People who know him say he is an honest officer.
But going by the charges, Prime Minister and senior officials in the PMO should also be named as the final decision was taken by them only," he said.
CBI has registered a case against Parakh and industrialist Kumar Mangalam Birla on charges of criminal conspiracy and corruption in connection with alleged irregularities in the allocation of two coal blocks in Odisha in 2005.
Parakh has dubbed as 'baseless' allegations levelled against him by the CBI.
"There is absolutely nothing wrong with the decision.
It was a very fair and correct decision that we took.
I don't know why CBI thought that there is a conspiracy," Parakh has said.
"But, if there is a conspiracy, then there are different members in this conspiracy.
There is K M Birla who made the representation, he is one conspirator.
I, who examined the case and made a recommendation, I can be another conspirator and the Prime Minister, who as the Coal Minister, took the final decision, is the third conspirator.
"So, if the CBI thinks there is a conspiracy, why did they choose and select Mr Birla and me and not the PM.
If conspiracy is there, then everyone is part of the conspiracy," he contended.
Refuting former coal secretary P.C.
Parakhs assertion that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, who headed the coal ministry when two Orissa-based coal blocks were allocated to Hindalco in 2005, should also be named an accused in the latest case of the Coalgate scam, the CBI on Wednesday maintained it had found clinching evidence that established that Parakh had abused his official position and showed undue favour to Hindalco.
Industry rattled after CBI net over Birla
Talking to this newspaper on Wednesday, CBI director Ranjit Sinha said, The CBI has registered the case on the basis of scientific and documentary evidence collected by it during the course of investigation.
Whatever he (Parakh) has to say, he is free to explain before the CBI during his examination. The FIR was registered after a thorough investigation during the preliminary enquiry, he said, adding that every piece of evidence was thoroughly examined.
He refused to comment on Parakh's remarks.
The CBI is to submit its probe report on the Coalgate scam before the Supreme Court on October 29.
Regarding Parakh's claims, CBI sources revealed that it was the former coal secretary who had allegedly overruled the decision of the 25th Screening Committee and allocated blocks to Hindalco that had been meant only for PSUs.
Parakh allegedly ignored the considered deliberations and recommendations of the Screening Committee, of which he was chairman.
For the CBI, the PM (also heading the coal ministry at that time) signed Parakh's recommendation.
Parakh defended his decision to withdraw the recommendation of coal block allocation to the PSU Neyveli Lignite and give a fresh recommendation to allocate the block to the joint venture company of Neyveli and Birla's Hindalco as a "rectification of (that) which was not right".
Admitting that a meeting took place between him and Birla, Parakh told Deccan Chronicle:
"Mr Birla made an application for reconsideration and I processed and recommended it.
Then the Prime Minister approved it.
The file was sent to the PM."
"The screening committee is only a recommending body.
The decision is finally taken by the government.
There was nothing wrong in the government's decision.
If something is wrong then the PM is equally responsible," Parakh said.
"The case can be attributed to me but it cannot be proved.
The CBI has no case at all.
The CBI does not understand the whole process.
It is trying to make a case where there is no case.
I will wait till the CBI files a chargesheet against me and will take up the legal fight," he said and added:
"I am not going to file any petition in court dragging (in) the Prime Minister."
The CBI had on Tuesday booked industrialist Aditya Birla Group chairman Kumar Mangalam Birla and the former coal secretary for alleged irregularities in the allocation of two Orissa-based coal blocks to his (Birla's) private firm, Hindalco, in 2005.
The agency also recovered Rs 25 crore of unaccounted money during searches at the Hindalco office in Delhi.
Asked about reports that the CBI is also probing possible "quid pro quo" in the allocation of the Talabira II coal blocks in Orissa to Hindalco, the CBI director said, "One thing I just want to make clear is that the CBI is not investigating any quid pro quo in the allocation of Talabira II coal blocks.
One must read the sections under which the CBI has registered this case."
They have been booked under 120B of the IPC (criminal conspiracy) and 13(2) read with 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, for the abuse of official position, he said, adding there is no probe of any quid pro quo at all.
Earlier on Wednesday, talking to reporters in Hyderabad, Parakh said, "If there is a conspiracy, then there are different members in this conspiracy.
There is K.M.
Birla who made the representation, he is one conspirator.
I, who examined the case and made a recommendation, I can be another conspirator, and the Prime Minister, who as the coal minister took the final decision, is the third conspirator.
Therefore, if there is a conspiracy, all of us should be made accused."
Asked whether the PM should be named the "first conspirator", he said, "Must be."
He added that if the CBI thinks there is a conspiracy, "Why did they choose and select Birla and me and not the PM?
If a conspiracy is there, then everyone is part of the conspiracy."
Saying the allegation against him is baseless, Parakh said, "There is absolutely nothing wrong with the decision.
It was a very fair and correct decision that we took.
I don't know why the CBI thought there is a conspiracy."
He said the then MoS in the coal ministry, Dasari Narayana Rao, must be named by the CBI as the files went through him.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has filed a fresh case in the coal-block-allocation scam against the chairman of the Aditya Birla Group and Hindalco Industries, Kumar Mangalam Birla, and former coal secretary PC Parekh.
The charges relate to criminal conspiracy and corruption in the allocation of a captive coal block in 2005 in Orissa, which was pri-marily meant for public sector firms.
Following the registration of the first information report (FIR), its 14th in the case, the CBI carried out searches at the offices of the group across Delhi, Kolkata, Bhubaneswar and Mumbai.
Searches were also carried out at the former coal secretary's residence in Secuderabad.
The accused have been booked for criminal conspiracy under section 120B of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
The AV Birla Group, on its part, has strongly denied the charges stating that every process stipulated under the coal allocation policy by the government were followed.
This relates to media reports on an FIR naming Hindalco and our chairman on the coal issue.
Apparently, this seems to be part of a larger case entailing coal allocation to companies, and being one of the companies, we are being investigated also.
We wish to state unambiguously that we have followed every process required for allocation of coal completely, as stipulated by the government policy, a company statement said.
The agency has booked Birla as a representative of AV Birla Group and its group company, aluminium maker Hindalco.
According to a CBI statement, the allegation against Birla and his company is that he influenced the then coal secretary in getting the block, Talabira II in Orissa, allocated to Hindalco, when its was meant only for allocation to public sector firms.
The investigative agency said that the block was allocated to Neyveli Lignite and Mahanadi Coalfields (both PSUs) in 2005 but sometime in the middle of the year Birla met Parekh after which the earlier decision of the screening committee was overturned and Hindalco was also accommodated along with the two.
This lead to notional loss to the exchequer.
CBI today registered two enquiries to look into the issue of missing files on coal block allocations from the Coal Ministry.
We have registered two preliminary enquiries.
One is for the period between 1993 and 2005 and another is for the period 2006-09, CBI Director Ranjit Sinha told PTI.
CBI sources said the agency received a letter from the Coal Ministry on Wednesday giving list of documents which have been traced in the Ministry record rooms.
The ministry urged CBI to consider the letter as complaint.
The preliminary enquiries have been registered against unknown persons, CBI spokesperson Kanchan Prasad said.
Later, the agency officials held a meeting with the Coal Ministry officials to reconcile the files which are still not traceable and require a thorough probe by the agency.
The sources said during the reconciliation it became clear that 15-18 crucial files which are related to coal block allocations done in different batches are not traceable and it is affecting the agencys probe.
Based on the conclusions drawn during the meeting, the agency decided to split its enquiry in two partsfiles relating to allocations done during the period spanning from 2006-09 in which CBI has registered 13 FIRs so far and files related to the period between 1993 and 2005 in which no FIR has been registered, the sources said.
They said the agency decided to proceed with the preliminary enquiry as there was not enough material to register a regular case or FIR.
During the analysis of documents and interactions with the Coal Ministry officials, CBI found that some of the crucial files are not in existence.
The sources said one such case is of the files related to minutes of the 26th screening committee, which are not available in the Ministry and despite best efforts only the draft minutes could be traced.
They said the agency would look into the issue of such missing files as decisions have been taken referring to the minutes of the screening committee which are said to be not in existence.
On Monday, the Coal Ministry had sent a tranche of documents along with the list of files and records.
The preliminary analysis had shown not all files sought by the agency were provided by the Ministry.
CBI is looking for crucial records related to ongoing 13 cases filed by it in connection with the coal blocks allocation scam which include the letter of Congress MP Vijay Darda recommending coal block for AMR Iron and Steel, one of the accused companies.
Last week, CBI had listed 150 files and documents as not received.
In the list given to the Coal Ministry, CBI also sought the files which include allotments made to Tata Sponge Iron Private Limited, minutes of the 26th screening committee, allotment to Jharkhand Ispat Private Limited and the agenda form sent by the company to Under Secretary S K Kakkar.
The Supreme Court had, while hearing the case on August 29, directed CBI to give a list of documents, files and information, sought by it, within five days to the Coal Ministry which, in turn, would furnish them within two weeks.
The agency in its letter dated September 2 to Attorney General G E Vahanvati had given an exhaustive list of over 50 allocations, the files of which have not been received by it.
The apex court had directed the Coal Ministry that if any document remains untraceable, then FIRs have to be lodged by the Coal Ministry with CBI within a week thereafter.
Holding that the missing documents are vital for the probe in the scam, the apex court directed the Coal Ministry to lodge complaint with CBI if it fails to trace any document sought by the agency.
CBI on Friday lodged two preliminary enquiry (PE) complaints against unknown persons to probe 18 missing files related to coal block allocations made from 1993 to 2009.
We have lodged two preliminary enquiries to investigate missing files, said CBI director Ranjit Sinha.
A CBI source said, We filed the PEs based on the coal ministrys communication on Monday which only contained a status-report of files.
CBIs coal block allocation scam probe is getting hampered in six cases pertaining to alleged irregularities by private firms as 12 files are missing.
Among files suspected to be missing is the scrutiny report on the financial strength of applicant companies.
The Central Bureau of Investigation will soon lodge an FIR into a dozen-odd missing files in the Coalgate scam following failure of the Coal Ministry to locate these documents.
These include those containing details of the minutes of meeting of Screening Committee and records pertaining to allocation of coal blocks to big corporate houses for mega power projects.
Top CBI sources said they were still awaiting a final word from the Ministry although the agency sleuths had a meeting with Ministry officials on Thursday where it was decided to lodge FIRs in case of missing files. The lodging of an FIR will entail naming of former and present officials of the Coal, Steel, Mines and Power Ministries and even those in the PMO who were instrumental in taking decisions in allocation of coal blocks.
Fingers would also be pointed at officials in the State governments and that is the reason why Coal Ministry was reluctant to order a formal probe into the matter, a senior CBI official said.
Interestingly, the file pertaining to the recommendation letter by Congress MP, Vijay Darda for coal block allocation to AMR Iron and Steel still missing and has not been found even in the PMO.
At Thursdays meeting, it was decided that a list of missing files would be given to CBI in the next two days along with a request to lodge a formal complaint on the basis of which investigations could be carried out.
The CBI officials made it clear that unless there was a request from the Coal Ministry, no FIR would be lodged, another official remarked.
Some of the crucial files pertaining to meetings of the Screening Committee remain untraced which could hamper investigations.
Both the CBI and Coal Ministry officials have zeroed down on nearly a dozen-odd files missing but the final list is likely to be compiled by the CBI and submitted to the Supreme Court which is monitoring the investigations.
Initially, the agency is likely to register a preliminary enquiry (PE) in case of missing files and later turn it into an FIR after some investigations.
One of the most important documents missing include minutes of the 26th Screening Committee meeting where crucial decision towards allocation of coal blocks were taken. There is no evidence to show that how coal blocks were allocated and why claims of some applicants were rejected.
The applications and related documents of many of the applicants have also remained untraced for some strange reason, officials said.
On Monday, the Ministry had a large number of files/documents handed over to the CBI.
But the CBI officials said that not all the files pertaining to the list they had submitted through the Attorney General had been found and sent by the Ministry.
The CBI had sought files which include allotments made to Tata Sponge Iron Private Limited, minutes of the 26th Screening Committee, allotment to Jharkhand Ispat Private Limited and Rathi Steel and Power.
The Supreme Court had, while hearing the case on August 29, directed CBI to give a list of documents, files and information, sought by it, within five days to the Coal Ministry which, in turn, would furnish them within two weeks.
The agency in its letter dated September 2 to Attorney General G.E.
Vahanvati had given an exhaustive list of over 50 allocations.
A team of Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) officials on Wednesday visited the Kalunga range office of the Central Excise, Custom & Service Tax at Civil Township here.
They examined documents reportedly in connection with inquiry into missing files of coal scam.
CBI sources are, however, tight-lipped and neither confirmed nor denied the teams visit.
But reliable sources said the team asked about documents related to coal transactions and other relevant papers.
As the Mahavir Ferro Alloys Pvt Ltd, a private sponge iron unit at Kalunga, was allotted a coal block in Sundargarh district, the CBI inquiry might be focusing on the sponge plant.
A senior CBI official said since the coalgate inquiry is conducted by the Bureaus officials from New Delhi, they have no information about Wednesdays visit.
The Centre had admitted before the Supreme Court last month that 7 files, 173 applications and 9 documents - all related to the coal scam - remained untraceable.
The Supreme Court on Thursday issued notice to seven States seeking their response on coal blocks allocation.
The Apex Court has directed directs the seven State Governments to file response by October 29.
The State Governments which have been issued notices are Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Orissa, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh and West Bengal.
These States have been asked to give details of agreements between Government companies which were allocated coal blocks with private parties.
The CBI on Tuesday questioned some coal ministry officials in connection with its probe into missing Coalgate files.
Some more officials have been asked to appear for examination, sources said.
The agency analyzed file movement records in the ministry and questioned officials who had handled a particular file before it went missing.
The agency suspects that some files may have been intentionally misplaced at the instance of corporate groups who stand accused.
The agency refused to reveal the identity of officials questioned as they are not considered as accused and CBI is yet to register a formal case.
The agency has registered two preliminary enquiries in connection with missing files after meeting coal ministry officials to reconcile the files which are not traceable.
Sources said during the reconciliation process, it became clear that 15-18 crucial files related to coal block allocations done in different batches were not traceable and it was affecting the agency's probe.
Based on the conclusions drawn during the meeting, the agency decided to split its enquiry in two parts - files relating to allocations done during the period spanning from 2006-09 in which CBI has registered 13 FIRs so far and files related to the period between 1993 and 2005 in which no FIR has been registered, sources said.
Nearly a year after registering its first FIR in the coal scam, CBI is likely to start filing charge sheets in connection with at least five cases registered by it as investigations have been completed.
CBI sources said the agency would inform the Supreme Court about the status of cases on October 4 and would proceed to file charge sheets.
They did not give details of the cases in which it is likely to file charge sheets as reports are being handed over in sealed covers to the apex court which is seized of the matter.
CBI is probing alleged irregularities in the allocation of 192 coal blocks which were made between 1993 to 2011.
The agency has registered three preliminary enquiries relating to allocations between 2006-09, allocations between 1993 to 2004 and allocations given to joint ventures.
So far, the agency has registered 13 FIRs arising out of its preliminary enquiries covering allocations between 2006-09.
The Supreme Court today turned its focus on the role of seven mineral-rich states in the coal scam case, asking them about their involvement in the allocation of coal blocks.
It put four questions to the governments of Maharashtra, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Odisha.
The court was hearing two public interest petitions regarding the coal scam for over two weeks.
The bench headed by Justice R M Lodha is examining whether the central government followed any policy at all amid allegations that the allocations were made to a few favourite firms.
The questions on which the response of the states are sought are: how did they understand the allocation policy of the central government, what were their individual roles in the allocations, what were the steps subsequently taken after the allocations in accordance with the provisions of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulations) Act, and the details of the agreements entered into by the state public sector undertakings with private companies on the blocks allocated to them.
The petitioners, lawyer Manohar Lal Sharma and Common Cause have alleged gross irregularities in the allocations and sought their cancellations as they were made to chosen firms without any criteria for qualifications.
Attorney General G E Vahanvati has been valiantly defending the allocations for the past few days.
CBI is likely to question Congress MP and industrialist Naveen Jindal tomorrow in connection with a case of alleged cheating and criminal conspiracy in bagging Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Birbhum in 2008.
The agency has booked him in its 12th FIR in connection with coal blocks allocation scam registered in June this year.
Former Minister of State for Coal Dasari Narayan Rao has also been booked by the agency in the case.
The Supreme Court on Wednesday questioned the Centre on why certain companies are always favoured in the allocation of mines and minerals which has resulted in creating "monopoly" for them.
At the outset of proceedings in coal block allocation scam, a bench headed by Justice R M Lodha said the names of the companies in the list of coal allottees are same as those figuring in other cases pertaining to extraction of iron ore mines.
"Same companies are there in iron ore mines cases also which I heard earlier.
You are creating monopoly in hands of certain companies.
Same companies are there whether it is coal, iron ore or other resources," the bench, also comprising justices Madan B Lokur and Kurian Joseph, said without naming the companies.
Attorney General G E Vahanvati, however, said that no rule was violated by the Centre while allocating coal blocks to companies.
He submitted that coal blocks allocation is merely a letter of intent and does not confer any right to the companies over the natural resource which is decided by the state government.
Pushed on the backfoot by the Supreme Court on the various procedural infirmity in allocation, the AG submitted that decision of coal block allocation to companies is the first stage and firms get rights over coal only when they start mining for which they have to take various clearances.
"No right is created in favour of companies by allocating coal blocks.
At the most it can be said that it is is letter of intent," the AG said, adding that all procedure was followed in the allocations.
The apex court also raised questions on delay in granting forest clearance to those companies which have been allocated coal blocks since 1993.
"Forest clearance which has to be given must have some reasonable meaning which must be given in a reasonable time.
"The question is can it be a indefinite waiting for forest clearance.
If it takes 20 years for forest clearance, is it not coming in the way of whole object of the coal block allocation," the bench said.
The bench also said in the scheme of things there is no idea how the Centre was thinking about the coal block allocation.
"The centre and its executives which took the decision never thought upon it to discuss allocation of coal blocks.
The Centre and the PSU were only thinking to grant lease," the bench said, adding that "there was absolutely no contemplation of allocation".
The CBI on Thursday grilled Congresss Lok Sabha member and industrialist Naveen Jindal for several hours in the multi-crore coal allocation scandal.
Two of his firms are accused of cheating to get a coal block in Jharkhand.
Jindal was grilled at an undisclosed location more than three months after the investigating agency named him and three of his firms in an FIR on June 10, HT has learnt.
If needed, he may be called in for questioning again.
The scam has caused a great deal of embarrassment for the Centre, with the national auditor accusing it of arbitrarily allocating mines.
We questioned Naveen Jindal today on allegations related to the misrepresentation and concealments of facts in the application and feedback forms by two of his firms Jindal Steel and Power Limited and Gagan Sponge Iron Private Limited to the Amarkonda Murgadangal block in Jharkhand, a CBI source told HT on Thursday.
Jindal, who fought a court battle that allowed citizens to hoist the Tricolour through the year rather than just on national holidays, refused comment when contacted by HT.
The power ministry had not recommended the two firms for allocation because of their poor preparedness in setting up respective end-use power plants, but a screening committee gave them the block in 2008, the source said.
The firms also concealed the fact that their group companies had been allocated blocks earlier as well.
Jindal had requested that he be questioned in a discreet manner, which the CBI accepted, the source said.
The agency recently questioned three senior bureaucrats about allocations made during 2006-09, when Prime Minister Manmohan Snigh was also holding the coal portfolio.
We recently questioned a former joint secretary in the PMO Vini Mahajan, PMO joint secretary Shatrughan Singh and coal ministrys joint director AK Bhalla, said the source.
Singh and Bhalla, who is now part of the ministrys search committee that is looking for missing coal files, were in the news a few months ago when the CBI shared with them the draft of the probe status report that it was to submit to the Supreme Court.
We are yet to decide on when to question TKA Nair, who was principal secretary to the Prime Minister in 2009, the source said.
Nair is an adviser to the PMO.
The agency would file an FIR if it would find that criminal intent was behind 18-odd allocation files going missing, the source said.
The SC, too, has sought clarification from the government on the matter.
The agency had already questioned the then minister of state for coal Dasari Narayana Rao for allegedly favouring the two Jindal firms by influencing the screening committees decision in return for a bribe of R2.25 crore, the source said.
The agency is expected to file four charge sheets in the scam in the coming days.
Shares of Aditya Birla-promoted firms such as Hindalco Industries Ltd, Aditya Birla Nuvo and Idea Cellular Ltd on Tuesday fell by up to 5 per cent after the CBI registered a case against industrialist Kumar Mangalam Birla in connection with alleged irregularities in allocation of coal blocks in 2005.
However, later, some of these stocks recovered lost ground, with Hindalco trading higher by 0.45 per cent and Idea up 0.03 per cent in late morning trade.
Hindalco Industries' scrip had tanked 4.97 per cent to Rs 105.10, while Aditya Birla Nuvo had fallen by 4.16 per cent to Rs 1,209.90 and Idea Cellular lost 1.35 per cent to Rs 182.45 on the BSE.
Among others, shares of Grasim Industries Ltd fell by 1.18 per cent, while Aditya Birla Chemicals was down 1.42 per cent and Aditya Birla Money shed 3.71 per cent.
After registering the 14th FIR in the coal scam, CBI teams carried out coordinated searches at nearly six locations in Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad and Bhubaneshwar.
CBI sources said the agency has booked Birla as a representative of Aditya Birla Group and his group company Hindalco for alleged corruption in the allocation of Talabira two coal block in Odisha which was allotted to it on November 10, 2005.
CBI on Tuesday lodged a case against industrialist Kumar Mangalam Birla and former coal secretary P C Parekh on charges of criminal conspiracy and corruption in connection with alleged irregularities in allocation of coal blocks eight years ago.
After registering the fresh FIR, its 14th in the multi-crore scandal, coordinated searches were carried out by CBI teams at nearly six locations in Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad and Bhubaneshwar.
The 46-year-old head of the Aditya Birla group will be called in for questioning, CBI sources said.
The agency has booked Birla as a representative of Aditya Birla Group and his group company, aluminium maker Hindalco, for alleged corruption in the allocation of Talabira two coal blocks in Odisha which was allotted to it on November 10, 2005, the sources said.
The blocks were allocated for power production during a meeting of the screening committee, they said.
"CBI registers a fresh case in alleged irregularities in coal scam against the then Coal Secretary, M/s Hindalco, representative of Adita Birla Group, unknown persons and officials," agency spokesperson Kanchan Prasad said.
The $40 billion (about Rs. 2.45 lakh crore) conglomerate has denied receiving any FIR and refuted allegations of any wrongdoing.
The CBI action had an immediate fallout with Hindalco shares dropping in the morning by 1.27 per cent.
Some of the other Birla companies were also affected.
Parekh, who was coal secretary at the time of this allocation, faces charges under the Prevention of Corruption Act as also criminal conspiracy and other offences.
CBI has been at the receiving end in the Supreme Court which has passed tough questions on why coal fields were allocated to private players without a transparent bidding process, the slow pace of probe as also on missing files.
Shares of Aditya Birla Group companies tanked the most in three months on Tuesday after the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) named group Chairman Kumar Mangalam Birla in a case relating to alleged irregularities in allocation of coal mining rights.
A question mark also hung over the fate of the Aditya Birla Groups bid to acquire a banking licence.
Former Coal Secretary P. C.
Parekh was also named in the First Information Report (FIR).
Besides Birla and Parekh, the FIR listed unnamed government officials and Hindalco. They have been booked for criminal conspiracy under Section 120B of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) read with Section 13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, a source in the investigating agency said.
Simultaneous searches are going on at Mumbai, Delhi, Bhubaneswar and Hyderabad, the source added.
The FIR, the 14th the CBI has filed in its ongoing investigation into the alleged scam in allocation of coal mining rights, is regarding discrepancies in the allocation of the Talabira-II block.
The block, allocated in 2005, is located in Jharsuguda district of Odisha.
The coal from the mine was to be used for power production.
While the lodging of an FIR indicates that the CBI thinks there is a prima facie case, formal charges are framed in court when it actually begins prosecuting the case.
So far, no charges have been framed in any of the 14 cases the CBI has filed on the coal scam.
The first FIR was filed on September 4, 2012.
Hindalco shares fell nearly 5 per cent in morning trade, before recovering to close with a marginal gain of 1.45 per cent at Rs 112.20 on the BSE.
Shares of other group companies such as AB Nuvo and Idea Cellular were impacted.
Hindalco denied there were any irregularities and said it had followed due process. Apparently, this seems to be part of a larger case entailing coal allocation to companies, and being one of the companies, we are being investigated also.
We wish to state unambiguously that we have followed every process required for allocation of coal completely, as stipulated by the Government policy, a company statement said.
However, the FIR is likely to hurt the Birla Groups bid for a banking licence, sources in the banking sector said.
The committee (headed by former RBI Governor Bimal Jalan) examining applications for new banking licences is not going to ignore the legal actions initiated against promoters of various licence aspirants by governmental agencies such as the CBI, a banking industry insider said.
In deciding candidates that fulfil the fit & proper criteria, pending legal cases can influence the decision of the committee, the sources added.
On June 11, 2013 Congress Member of Parliament Naveen Jindal, his company Jindal Steel and Power, and former Minister of State for Coal Dasari Narayana Rao were also named in an FIR and later quizzed by the investigating agency.
Delhi-based Rathi Steel and its promoter have been named in another case.
CBI sources said Kumar Mangalam Birla, the 46-year-old head of the Rs 2.45-lakh-crore Aditya Birla Group, is also likely to be questioned.
The group includes companies such as Hindalco, Grasim, Aditya Birla Nuvo, UltraTech, Idea, and Novelis.
Between coalgate and spectrum scam, a number of corporate honchos have come under the scanner of investigating agencies in the last two years.
While Sunil Mittal, Chairman and Managing Director, Bharti Group, Ravi Ruia, Vice-Chairman, Essar Group, and Anil Ambani, Chairman, Reliance Communications, are associated with the 2G spectrum case, Naveen Jindal, Chairman of Jindal Steel and Power Ltd, has been named as an accused in the coal scam.
Most of these cases are either being investigated or are under trial.
In the case of Sunil Mittal, the Special Court hearing the 2G spectrum case summoned him saying he was in control of affairs of Bharti Airtel when the alleged irregularities were committed in grant of excess spectrum during the NDA regime.
Ravi Ruia of Essar is also facing similar charges.
Anil Ambani was summoned by the court hearing the 2G spectrum scam case in which a number of telecom companies lost their licences.
Outside telecom, Naveen Jindal has been named in the coal block allocation scam.
Slamming Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik for writing to the Centre favouring a coal block to Hindalco, opposition BJP and Congress today sought to know why he had "selectively recommended" the case of Aditya Birla Group, giving it "preferential treatment".
Claiming that the Chief Minister gave a statement on his own yesterday as he feared that CBI was coming to examine him, BJP Odisha unit President K V Singhdeo said the clarification was nothing but a "panic reaction".
Voicing similar views, Leader of Opposition in state Assembly Bhupinder Singh told reporters separately "nobody sought a clarification from Patnaik and I cannot understand why he came out with an explanation for his act of writing to the prime minister and recommending the case of Hindalco."
After Hindalco episode, probe should be launched to find out other companies for whom the chief minister had recommended allocation of coal blocks or other mines, the senior Congress leader said.
"Irregularities in coal and other mining operations in the state should now be investigated by CBI," he said, adding Congress had all along been demanding a white paper on mining scam and CBI probe into the matter which was turned down by the state government and now the premier investigating agency is about to knock the door of the chief minister.
Singhdeo said Patnaik's explanation that the recommendation in favour of Hindalco was made keeping the best interests of the state, was 'unconvincing', while Singh sought to know how many jobs had been generated by CM's act.
Claiming that though many other industries wanted coal blocks, Patnaik chose to plead for Hindalco, both the leaders said the chief minister must explain why he gave "preferential treatment and selectively recommended" the case of Hindalco instead of following the policy of a level playing field.
The BJP leader said the Chief Minister was trying to shift the buck to the Centre by stating that the final decision for coal block allocation rested with it, while Singh said the BJD government in Odisha was following a policy in order to "favour selected" corporate houses.
Claiming that Aditya Birla group's application for coal block had been rejected in 1999 during NDA rule when Patnaik was Union minister, Singhdeo said, "It is surprising how Patnaik went against the stand taken by the government in which he was a minister."
"The UPA government should also explain why the decision of the previous NDA rule was reversed," he said.
A mammoth CBI team from Dhanbad today fanned out across Bermo sub-division, about 36km from Bokaro steel city, to conduct raids at the residences and offices of several CCL officials and coal merchants in connection with the Kathara colliery scam.
The 30-member team, which had divided itself into seven groups, is learnt to have seized a good number of files and documents, which can expose the unholy nexus between CCL officials and the mafia that facilitated large-scale smuggling of coal from Kathara from 2006 to 2008.
The raids, spanning over seven hours from 6.30am, took place at the residence and office of project officer of CCLs Swang coal washery J.S.
Srivastav, coal measurement officer Ajay Singh, his predecessor Pramod Singh and clerk Islam Ansari.
There coal merchants Nizam Ansari, Mohammad Hasim Ansari and Rahamtulla Iftekar Ansari also faced the heat.
At least two of those raided a CCL employee and a coal transporter are related to a former Bokaro MLA.
Pramod Singh was not present at his Kathara residence when the CBI team came calling.
The sleuths questioned his son Guddan for over an hour.
A CBI DSP, who did not want to be named, said: The seized documents are enough to establish that coal was illegally transported from the colliery with the help of CCL officials.
More heads are set to roll.
The Central Bureau of Investigation and the Centre were at loggerheads in the Supreme Court over the coal scam, with the agency pointing out irregularities in the coal block allocation during the first United Progressive Alliance government, and the Government vehemently denying the allegations.
The CBI, in its status report, said the coal block allocation during 2006-09 was done without verifying the credentials of companies, which allegedly misrepresented facts about themselves.
A three-judge bench headed by Justice R M Lodha, which went through the report filed in a sealed cover, said that the report prima facie alleges irregularities, but the Attorney General G E Vahanvati aggressively hit back on the finding saying, CBI is not the final word on this.
Vahanvati, however, clarified that the Government has no problem with CBI probe and pleaded the court to supply him with some part of the probe report on which he would respond.
I am not trying to pre-empt the inquiry.
I have no problem with it.
Let CBI probe the allocation, the AG said.
The bench said the government should make a statement cautiously as it might affect the CBI probe in the case.
Any of your comments must not prejudice CBI inquiry in the case.
If you are challenging the very conspiracy angle of the controversy, then it would affect the probe, the bench, which also had justices J Chelameswar and Madan B Lokur, said.
The bench further directed the government to explain why a small group of companies have been picked and chosen for allocation of coal blocks out of the large number of companies that applied for it.
The court also asked the CBI Director to file an affidavit that the status report submitted by the agency on March 8 was vetted by him and not shared with political executives and the same will be followed in future.
The court was hearing a PIL filed by various members of civil society including former CEC N Gopalaswami, former Navy chief L Ramdas and former Cabinet Secretary T S R Subramanian and advocate M L Sharma seeking a SIT probe into the coal block allocation scam.
During the hearing, when it was told that the apex court appointed central empowered committee can also be involved in the inquiry, the bench said it was not going into individual cases, as it was not required.
We are not on individual case broadly.It has to be seen that whether guidelines were followed or not.
The entire allocation goes if no procedure was followed, the bench observed.
The bench also observed that procedure followed prima facie does not seem to be proper legal procedure.
Therefore, I just want to know whether the entire factual position has been stated (in government's affidavit) or something more is to be said, the court said.
On January 24, the apex court had questioned the Centre's power to allocate coal blocks to companies, saying it has a lot of legal explanation to do as the statutory Act empowers only the states to undertake this task.
The court had said that the Centre cannot undermine the Mines and Minerals Act which has given no power to it to allocate coal block to companies.
The court's remarks came after the CBI had informed it that investigations into the coal block allocations have established irregularities by government authorities in allocation of the natural resources and around 300 companies are under its scanner.
In an affidavit filed before the apex court, the agency had said that it is taking up the probe against each and every company which has been allocated coal block since 1993 and in particular during the period 2006 to 2008.
The agency had also placed before the apex court a list of the companies and their directors against whom FIR has so far been lodged.
The agency had said that it is not revealing all information of its probe in order to preserve the confidentiality and integrity of the inquiry.
The affidavit was filed in response to the apex court order which had directed it to file comprehensive reply on the alleged irregularities in the coal blocks allocation.
A team of CBI sleuths today raided the offices and residences of four former Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) officials to probe their alleged involvement in a scam in which around 12.75 million tonnes coal was found to be short at Dhori colliery.
The 12-member team, led by DSP Umesh Kumar and inspector K.K.
Singh, targeted the Bermo-based offices and residences of A.K.
Chowdhry (former project manager), S.K.
Singh (former project manager), Virendra Singh (former manager) and B.K.
Jha (former mining staff officer) and seized several files, documents and computer discs.
Questions were also raised against then general manager of Dhori colliery Uma Shankar Singh, who many believed had a role to play in the scam.
All the officials in question were posted at Dhori in 2010, when the anomaly was detected by the internal vigilance wing of CIL.
The matter was subsequently was referred to the Union coal ministry, which handed it over to the CBI.
The raid, which started around 7am, continued for more than eight hours, with the sleuths grilling of S.K.
Singh, Virendra Singh and B.K Jha.
A.K.
Chowdhry, however, was not present in his residence and the CBI officials sealed his office and house.
Dhanbad CBI SP P.K.
Manjhi confirmed the raids.
Deputy chief minister Sushil Kumar Modi on Tuesday alleged that RJD Rajya Sabha member Premchand Gupta was involved in financial wrongdoings with the assets of his company, which had been indicted by the CAG over coal block allocation.
While demanding a thorough probe, the BJP leader also released documents to support his allegation.
Gupta, who hails from Haryana, surfaced in the 1990s as a close confidant of RJD chief Lalu Prasad and has been nominated by the party to the Rajya Sabha thrice.
During UPA-I, Lalu Prasad got him into the cabinet as the Union minister of state for corporate affairs.
In the recent CAG report, Guptas name surfaced as IST & Power Limited was given coal block at Dahegoan, Makarbhokra in Nagpur, on June 17, 2009.
The coal block was jointly allocated to IST Steel & Power Limited, a company in the name of Guptas sons, Gujarat Ambuja and Lafarge India.
However, the better-known Gujarat Ambuja and Lafarge India were allotted 36 million tonnes (MT) and 25 MT, respectively.
The lions share of 132 MT went to IST Steel & Power Limited.
Modi distributed documents related to listing of IST Steel & Power Limited in Mumbai and Honk Kong stock exchanges.
The papers of Bombay Stock Exchange show that 49% shares of IST Steel and Power Limited is owned by Gupta International Investment Co.
Ltd, a Hong Kong-based company.
Gupta is director of this company, Modi said.
He added that Gupta Investment International Co Ltd has the MPs Hong Kong residential address, Ground floor, 65, Wyndham Street, with his Hong Kong identity card number XD 005190(5).
RJD chief Lalu Prasad said he was aware that Gupta had a company in Hong Kong for the last 40 years.
But he termed the charges against his close aide false.
I know Modi for many years.
He is spreading false information against Gupta, Lalu said, refusing to reply to specific charges against the former Union minister.
Modi also alleged that foreign money had been pumped into Gupta Investment International Co.
Limited in the name of Cecil Corporation Limited, which held 1,20,800 shares of the Gupta company.
The CBI today booked industrialist-turned-Congress MP Naveen Jindal and former central minister Dasari Narayan Rao in the coal allocation controversy, accusing them of a host of graft-related charges including a quid-pro-quo deal camouflaged as investment.
This is the first time that the agency, rapped by the Supreme Court last month for speaking like a caged parrot in the voice of its political master, has named a former minister in its probe into the alleged scam.
The agency also named unknown officials of the governments screening committee in its FIR, its 12th in the case. We registered the 12th FIR in the case in which both Jindal and Rao have been accused of criminal misconduct, conspiracy and cheating, said a senior CBI official.
In the FIR, the agency accused three companies owned by Jindal Jindal Steel and Power Limited, Gagan Sponge Iron Limited and Jindal Realty and ND Exim and Raos Saubhagya Media of cheating and misrepresentation of facts in bagging the Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Jharkhand in 2008.
The agency said Rao, who was minister of state for coal then, received Rs 2.25 crore camouflaged as investment from one of Jindal's firm within a year of allocating him a coal block.
A probe has revealed that Jindals company had allegedly invested about Rs 2 crore in a firm owned by Rao in exchange for being granted coal fields, the CBI official said.
After registering the FIR, officers of the CBIs anti-corruption branch fanned out for searches across 15 locations, including residences and offices of Jindal in Delhi and those of Rao in Hyderabad.
In the FIR we have accused Jindal, Rao and the companies of hatching a criminal conspiracy and cheating and also slapped relevant provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act against them, the official said, adding that the agency had collected documents during searches at Jindals 6 Prithviraj Road residence and offices of his firms in central Delhi.
A senior official of Jindal Steel and Power Limited said JSPL was a law abiding company governed by a strong ethical code of conduct. This is an ongoing CBI investigation into coal block allocation.
At this stage of investigation, JSPL is committed to fully cooperate with the CBI, said Manu Kapoor, head of the companys external affairs division.
Rao has already been quizzed by the agency in connection with the ongoing probe.
Last year, as news of his suspected involvement surfaced, he had said in private circles that though he participated in some of the coal auction meetings, the final decision was made by PMO officials only. We only did the postmans job, Rao had said.
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Tuesday registered cases against five companies and unknown government officials as part of its probe into alleged irregularities in allocation of coal blocks and carried out searches across 10 cities.
According to CBI spokesperson, five FIRs have been filed against five companies and unknown government officials for alleged cheating.
The agency sleuths were also conducting searches at 30 places in ten cities including Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Patna, Hyderabad, Dhanbad and Nagpur, the spokesperson said.
The filing of FIRs comes three months after registration of a Preliminary Enquiry into the coal scam by the agency on the directions of the Central Vigilance Commission.
During the Preliminary Enquiry, the CBI was informed by the Coal ministry officials that it had issued show cause notices to some of the firms which were allocated the mines for explaining the delay in conducting the mining work
Some of the firms, which were allocated coal blocks in 2005, were yet to start mining, official sources said.
The CBI had also examined the past areas of operation of some of the companies which were allotted coal blocks in Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Karnataka, the sources said alleging some of these firms had been set up only for getting coal blocks allocated and the same was later sublet to other companies at a premium.
The agency has already questioned senior bureaucrats who were overseeing allocation of coal blocks during 2005-09, the sources said.
They said the questioning of the Coal Secretaries, who also chair the screening committee, was done to understand the issues involved in the allocation of coal blocks during the period and so far the agency has not found any irregularities on their part.
Industrialist Kumar Mangalam Birla and former Coal Secretary P C Parekh have been booked by the CBI on charges of criminal conspiracy and corruption in connection with alleged irregularities in the allocation of two coal blocks eight years back.
After registering the fresh FIR with a CBI court here, agency teams today carried out coordinated searches at nearly six locations in Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad and Bhubaneshwar which included offices of Hindalco and residence of Parekh in Sikandarabad, Hyderabad.
The CBI named 46-year-old Mr Birla, chairman of Aditya Birla Group, along with Mr Parekh and unknown persons and officials of Hindalco and Coal Ministry in the FIR, the 14th in the multi-crore scandal, for alleged criminal conspiracy and under provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
Mr Birla and Mr Parekh will be called in for questioning, CBI sources said.
Mr Birla has been named since the decision to accomodate Hindalco in the coal block, meant for PSUs only, was taken after he had a meeting with Parekh in the latter half of 2005.
The $40 billion (Rs.2.45 lakh crore) conglomerate has denied receiving any FIR and refuted allegations of any wrongdoing.
Hindalco informed Bombay Stock Exchange that We wish to state unambiguously that we have followed every process required for allocation of coal completely, as stipulated by the government policy.
This relates to media reports on an FIR naming Hindalco and our Chairman on coal issues.
Apparently, this seems to be part of a larger case entailing coal allocation to companies, and being one of the companies, we are being investigated also.
The CBI gave a statement saying that the agency had registered a case against the then Coal Ministry official; representative of Mumbai-based Group of Companies, Odisha-based Industry and unknown other persons and officials in connection with allocation of Talabira II and Talabira III coal blocks in Odisha.
Shares of Aditya Birla-promoted firms such as Hindalco Industries and AB Nuvo today ended the day on a mixed note, Hindalco Industries' scrip that had tanked 4.97 per cent to Rs 105.10 in intra-day trade, recouped the losses and finally ended the day with a gain of 1.45 per cent at Rs 112.20 on the BSE.
Former Coal Secretary P C Parakh, facing a CBI probe into alleged irregularities in coal block allocation, today triggered a storm by stating that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh had taken the final decision as head of the coal ministry and should also be named as a conspirator and made accused in the case.
if there is a conspiracy, then there are different members in this conspiracy.
There is K M Birla who made the representation, he is one conspirator.
I, who examined the case and made a recommendation, I can be another conspirator and the Prime Minister, who as the Coal Minister, took the final decision, is the third conspirator, Mr Parakh told reporters here.
Therefore, if there is a conspiracy, all of us should be made accused, he added Asked whether the PM should be named as the 'first conspirator', he said: Must be.
He is the final decision maker, responsibility lies with the Prime Minister as he could have overruled me.
It was ultimately his responsibility as the coal minister.
He said if the CBI thinks there is a conspiracy, why did they choose and select Birla and me and not the PM.
If conspiracy is there, then everyone is part of the conspiracy.
Meanwhile, the government today sought to take refuge in the fact that the matter is sub-judice and hit out at the BJP for being irresponsible.
Information and Broadcasting Minister Manish Tewari said the government has already provided all documents to the CBI and if anybody has to say anything, it should be at an appropriate forum and at an appropriate time.
The CBI has registered FIR against industrialist Kumar Mangalam Birla, Mr Parakh and others on charges of criminal conspiracy and under the provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act in connection with alleged irregularities in the allocation of two coal blocks in Odisha eight years back.
Terming the allocation to Hindalco of the Aditya Birla Group as a fair decision, Mr Parakh said Hindalco and PSU Neyveli Lignite Corporation had applied for a coal block.
He explained that Screening Committee under the coal ministry decided that it should be allocated to Neyveli as it was a PSU and was also eligible for the allocation.
But after the decision, Mr Birla made a representation to the PM that Hindalco should have been given the block as they were equally competent and were the first applicant.
The CBI on Thursday questioned Congress MP and industrialist Naveen Jindal in connection with a case of alleged cheating and criminal conspiracy for getting a coal block in 2008.
The move comes three months after a case was registered against Jindal for allegedly bagging the Amarkonda Murgadangal coal block in Jharkhand through dubious means.
Official sources said Jindal was summoned by CBI after which he made himself available for questioning.
The sleuths began his questioning in the afternoon and it continued till evening.
The agency conceded to his request that he should not be subjected to media glare after which the venue was changed from the CBI headquarters to a safe house where he was questioned, the sources said.
The agency has booked him in its 12th FIR in connection with coal blocks allocation scam registered in June this year.
Former Minister of State for Coal Dasari Narayan Rao has also been booked by the agency in the case.
CBI has registered a fresh case in connection with its coal blocks allocation probe against a Delhi-based steel company and carried out searches at its premises in the National Capital Region.
CBI sources said a case has been lodged against Rathi Steel and Power Limited, its Director Udit Rathi and unknown others for alleged cheating and misrepresentation of facts while applying for a coal block.
The sources said the company earlier known as Rathi Udyog Limited was allocated Kesla North coal block in Korba, Chhattisgarh for its sponge iron plant on August 5, 2008.
They said the company has allegedly misrepresented facts while applying for the coal block.
This is the 13th FIR in connection with the coal blocks allocation scam probe.
Soon after registering the FIR, CBI teams carried out searches at various residential and official premises of the company in Delhi and Ghaziabad.
CBI is probing alleged irregularities in the allocation of 192 coal blocks which were made between 1993 to 2011.
The agency has registered three preliminary enquiries in this connection-- related to allocation between 2006-09, allocation between 1993 to 2004 and allocations given to joint ventures.
So far, the agency has registered FIRs arising out of its preliminary enquiry covering allocation between 2006-09.
Congress MLA Raghavji Patels son Jayendra was booked by police in over Rs 70 lakh coal scam.
According to sources, the accused cheated a Jamnagar-based industry by supplying sub-standard coal.
As per the contract, he was supposed to supply imported coal priced around Rs 7,000 per tonne.
However, Patel was using two trucks with the same number plates. Imported coal used to load from Bedi port in Jamnagar in one truck.
But the other truck with the same number plate already loaded with domestic sub-standard coal would reach the industry, which was costing him Rs 1,000 per tonne, said an investigating officer.
Police said that the accused and his accomplice delivered around 2,000 tonnes of coals to the company.
The scam came to light following an anonymous call divulging detail pertaining to the supply of sub-standard coal.
The CBI has arrested one of its own Superintendents of Police, who was also involved in the investigation of coal blocks allocation scam, on the allegations of seeking and getting a bribe of Rs7 lakh for mediating in a case land dispute of an Alwar-based private person.
The exchange of money took place outside the CBI headquarters on Friday evening.
A CBI inspector was taking money on the behalf of the SP.
We have arrested SP Vivek Dutt along with Rajesh Karnatak, one of inspectors working under him for asking and getting Rs7 lakh from an Alwar-based private person Dinesh Gupta.
Inspector Rajesh Karanatak was acting as his conduit.
The inspector received money on behalf on the SP.
The SP and his inspector were arrested after an internal CBI vigilance probe, said a CBI official.
Sources said, it was a trap case wherein the inspector was arrested red-handed receiving money from Gupta.
Congress MP Naveen Jindal and former Minister of State for Coal Dasari Narayan Rao have been named as accused in the fresh FIR filed by CBI in connection with the coal allocation scam.
The agency has also booked Jindal Steel and Power and four other companies in the scam.
CBI sources said after registering the fresh cases, teams carried out searches today at 15 locations including the residence of Congress MP from Kurukshetra Jindal and Rao at New Delhi and Hyderabad respectively.
They said other companies including Gagan Sponge, Jindal Realty and New Delhi Exim besides Rao's company Saubhagya Media have been booked for alleged cheating and misrepresentation of facts in bagging Amarkonda Murgadangal block in Birbhum district of Jharkhand in 2008.
Reacting to the development, Head of External Affairs, Jindal Steel and Power Limited, Manu Kapoor said, "JSPL, as a law abiding company, is governed by a strong ethical code of conduct.
This is an ongoing CBI investigation into coal block allocation.
At this stage of investigation, JSPL is committed to fully cooperate with CBI."
This is the 12th FIR registered by the agency in connection with its probe in coal allocation scam.
The sources said Rao has already been questioned by the agency.
After former Coal Secretary PC Parakh's explosive comments on the role of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in the coal block allocation irregularities, there is no way that the latter can get away with his trademark silence.
Mr Parakh has raised pertinent issues, the most important being that the allegedly illegal allocation of blocks happened after the Prime Minister approved it on the files concerned.
It may be argued that, finding himself in the dock, the former Coal Secretary is seeking to muddy the waters by dragging in Mr Singh's name.
But that does not in any way blunt his observation that the Prime Minister should at the very least be named as one of the conspirators in the scam.
While it is for the Central Bureau of Investigation which is probing the issue and the Supreme Court which is monitoring the inquiry to take a call on the matter, the Prime Minister should not escape investigation.
Until now, the probe agency has been going after all and sundry including now one of the country's prominent industrialists except the person who took the final decision which led to the massive irregularities that the Comptroller and Auditor-General has exposed.
As Coal Minister in the period when the blocks were allotted in a haphazard fashion, Mr Singh could have prevented the wrongdoing by overruling his Secretary and the various vested interests who had lobbied to get their way.
That he did not, or could not, because of directions from some quarters, is apparent.
The Prime Minister is not above the law and he must be subjected to an inquiry similar to what others who are said to be complicit in the irregularities, are undergoing.
The First Information Report that the CBI has registered, says that Mr Parakh had initially denied coal blocks to an industrial group but he later did a U-turn and abused his position.
On his part, the former Coal Secretary has naturally denied any wrongdoing, but added the caveat that if he had erred, the Prime Minister was to blame as well, since he approved it.
Two questions arise here:
What made the then Coal Secretary capitulate in July 2005?
Why did the Prime Minister, who was then the Coal Minister too, not shoot down a proposal which was obviously flawed and not in accordance with the screening committee's observations?
The CBI has gone to great lengths to elaborate on a meeting between the head of an industrial group and Mr Parakh, following which, the probe agency claims in the FIR, the latter recommended the allocation of certain coal blocks to the business house.
But the investigation agency refuses to look beyond and strike at the root of the issue.
That should not surprise anyone.
From the start, the CBI has tried to make a hash of the matter, playing into the hands of the Congress-led UPA Government.
It allowed an affidavit in the case to be vetted by then Union Minister for Law and Justice Ashwani Kumar, although it had no business doing so because it was answerable to the court and none else on the issue.
It tried to obfuscate by dragging into the probe allocations made during the tenure of the Bharatiya Janata Party-led NDA.
All these efforts were to keep the incumbent Prime Minister out of the storm.
But despite, or because of, these brazen tactics, Mr Singh's image has sunk to irretrievable levels.
Social activist Anna Hazare today demanded that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh should step down from his post, accepting moral responsibility for the coal blocks allocation scam.
The picture is very clear in the coal scam.
The truth of the scam is coming out, so Manmohan Singh should not continue as Prime Minister.
He should resign accepting moral responsibility (for the scam), he said.
To a question, the anti-corruption crusader said, It is absolutely wrong to say that I am against Congress.
I have nothing to do with either BJP or Congress.
But my question is why BJP did not oppose the coal scam in Parliament in a forceful way?
